Year 12 Philosophy – Issues Analysis #2 - Ethics

What is a ‘Good Life’?
Learning Intentions:  Understand  and accurately explain  range of positions on what constitutes a good life. Explain why the ‘good life’ is a philosophical issue  by clarifying key concepts, assumptions, and points of disagreement. Develop, justify, and defend your own position  on  the good life  by using reasons, objections and replies, and by drawing on both philosophical perspectives and your lived-trial observations . Communicate  using  appropriate  philosophical  terminology  and conventions, with clear structure and acknowledged sources. Task  Description This task runs with the unit. Each week you will add a n  entry . Your final submission will synthesise your work into a position  that answers your question . You may submit your final work as: a structured piece of philosophical writing (up to 1500 words) a multimodal piece (up to 10 minutes) a hybrid (for example, 6 to 8 minutes plus 600 to 800 words) You will also complete a short oral defence (2 to 3 minutes) in class. Final Submission Date : Friday, Week 6. Task Instructions You will create weekly entries into a portfolio that culminates in a final Issues Analysis .  Your entries may be written or recorded. Select  one  question from the list below . What helps us live well, and what pulls us away from a good life? Can a life be good even when it involves significant suffering or loss? Does pursuing a good life get in the way of actually achieving a good life? Is character more important than experience in judging whether a life is good? Is the good life about what happens to  us , what  we  do, or how  we   perceive   life ? If you wish to explore a different question, discuss it with me for approval. Weekly  Trial s Each week  you  will  complete   a 7-day trial  aligned with that  week’s theory  and record observations about  happiness ,  challenges , and  insights   as they relate  to your question .  Each trial is based on a pre-existing, research-backed practice. A specific  protocol  and daily template for each trial will be provided in class. You  must  follow that protocol   and r ecord at least one observation in the template . W eek  2 :  Hedonism :  ‘savouring’   and ‘three daily pleasures’ W eek  3 :  Desire -Satisfaction  Theory:  the  ‘best possible self’ Week 4 : Spontaneity and Wu Wei W eek  5 :  Stoic ism:  ‘ last-time ’ meditations. W eek  6 :  Virtue Ethics:   ‘ using signature strengths’ Each Monday  in class , complete a short reflection addressing : How did  this practice  affect your  understanding  of a good life? How might the other theories differently interpret  that  experience?  You will use  these reflections as evidence in your  final   piece . Final  Submission Your final submission must : use at least two perspectives address  at least two observations  from your lived-strategy trials  as evidence must end with a defended answer to your  chosen  question. Your final  submission must do the following : Define  your  question  and why it is a philosophical issue   (and focus on it throughout) Explain at least  two   relevant  philosophical positions   and why those positions are  held. Analyse and e valuate  those positions  using reasons, objections, and examples . State, justify, and defend your own positio n , drawing on both philosophical reasoning and your lived-trial evidence. Use philosophical conventions: clear structure, signposted reasoning,  and  accurate terminology Include  a full   bibliography .


What is a ‘Good Life’?

Learning Intentions: 

Understand and accurately explain range of positions on what constitutes a good life.

Explain why the ‘good life’ is a philosophical issue by clarifying key concepts, assumptions, and points of disagreement.

Develop, justify, and defend your own position on the good life by using reasons, objections and replies, and by drawing on both philosophical perspectives and your lived-trial observations.

Communicate using appropriate philosophical terminology and conventions, with clear structure and acknowledged sources.

Task Description

This task runs with the unit. Each week you will add an entry.

Your final submission will synthesise your work into a position that answers your question.

You may submit your final work as:

a structured piece of philosophical writing (up to 1500 words)

a multimodal piece (up to 10 minutes)

a hybrid (for example, 6 to 8 minutes plus 600 to 800 words)

You will also complete a short oral defence (2 to 3 minutes) in class.

Final Submission Date: Friday, Week 6.

Task Instructions

You will create weekly entries into a portfolio that culminates in a final Issues Analysis. Your entries may be written or recorded.

Select one question from the list below.

What helps us live well, and what pulls us away from a good life?

Can a life be good even when it involves significant suffering or loss?

Does pursuing a good life get in the way of actually achieving a good life?

Is character more important than experience in judging whether a life is good?

Is the good life about what happens to us, what we do, or how we perceive life?

If you wish to explore a different question, discuss it with me for approval.

Weekly Trials

Each week you will complete a 7-day trial aligned with that week’s theory and record observations about happiness, challenges, and insights as they relate to your question. Each trial is based on a pre-existing, research-backed practice.

A specific protocol and daily template for each trial will be provided in class. You must follow that protocol and record at least one observation in the template.

Week 2: Hedonism: ‘savouring’ and ‘three daily pleasures’

Week 3: Desire-Satisfaction Theory: the ‘best possible self’

Week 4: Spontaneity and Wu Wei

Week 5: Stoicism: ‘last-time’ meditations.

Week 6: Virtue Ethics: ‘using signature strengths’

Each Monday in class, complete a short reflection addressing:

How did this practice affect your understanding of a good life?

How might the other theories differently interpret that experience? 

You will use these reflections as evidence in your final piece.

Final Submission

Your final submission must:

use at least two perspectives

address at least two observations from your lived-strategy trials as evidence

must end with a defended answer to your chosen question.

Your final submission must do the following:

Define your question and why it is a philosophical issue (and focus on it throughout)

Explain at least two relevant philosophical positions and why those positions are held.

Analyse and evaluate those positions using reasons, objections, and examples.

State, justify, and defend your own position, drawing on both philosophical reasoning and your lived-trial evidence.

Use philosophical conventions: clear structure, signposted reasoning, and accurate terminology

Include a full bibliography.

Stage 2 Philosophy Achievement Standards

Knowledge   and  Understanding | Reasoning   and  Argument | Critical   Analysis | Communication
A | Consistently clear and   perceptive   knowledge   and   understanding   of   philosophical issues and   positions. | Insightful   and   coherent   explanation of the   philosophical   nature   of   issues and positions. Coherent and convincing   formulation   and   defence   of   positions   taken. |  | Accurate, consistent, and   discerning use of   philosophical   terminology,   with   appropriate   acknowledgment   of   sources.
B | Clear and thoughtful   knowledge   and   understanding   of   philosophical   issues   and   positions. | Thoughtful and clear   explanation of the   philosophical   nature   of   issues and positions. Convincing   formulation   and   defence  of positions taken. |  | Mostly   accurate   and   relevant   use of philosophical   terminology,   with   appropriate   acknowledgment   of   sources.
C | Generally   clear   knowledge   and understanding of   philosophical issues and   positions. | Considered   and   generally   clear explanation of the   philosophical nature of   issues and positions. Considered   formulation   and   defence  of positions taken. |  | Generally appropriate use of   philosophical   terminology,   with mostly appropriate   acknowledgment   of   sources.
D | Some recognition and   awareness of a few   philosophical   issues   and   positions. | Partial or superficial   description of the   philosophical   nature   of   one   or more issues and/or   positions. Partial formulation and   defence   of   positions   taken. |  | Use of a limited range of   appropriate   philosophical   terminology, with some   acknowledgment   of   sources.

Knowledge and Understanding

Reasoning and Argument

Critical Analysis

Communication

A

Consistently clear and perceptive knowledge and understanding of philosophical issues and positions.

Insightful and coherent explanation of the philosophical nature of issues and positions.

Coherent and convincing formulation and defence of positions taken.

Accurate, consistent, and discerning use of philosophical terminology, with appropriate acknowledgment of sources.

B

Clear and thoughtful knowledge and understanding of philosophical issues and positions.

Thoughtful and clear explanation of the philosophical nature of issues and positions.

Convincing formulation and defence of positions taken.

Mostly accurate and relevant use of philosophical terminology, with appropriate acknowledgment of sources.

C

Generally clear knowledge and understanding of philosophical issues and positions.

Considered and generally clear explanation of the philosophical nature of issues and positions.

Considered formulation and defence of positions taken.

Generally appropriate use of philosophical terminology, with mostly appropriate acknowledgment of sources.

D

Some recognition and awareness of a few philosophical issues and positions.

Partial or superficial description of the philosophical nature of one or more issues and/or positions.

Partial formulation and defence of positions taken.

Use of a limited range of appropriate philosophical terminology, with some acknowledgment of sources.