Sixteen

THE ROOM into which the three were ushered was the Controller’s study.
“His fordship will be down in a moment.” The Gamma butler left them to
themselves.
Helmholtz laughed aloud.
“It’s more like a caffeine-solution party than a trial,” he said, and let himself fall
into the most luxurious of the pneumatic arm-chairs. “Cheer up, Bernard,” he
added, catching sight of his friend’s green unhappy face. But Bernard would
not be cheered; without answering, without even looking at Helmholtz, he went
and sat down on the most uncomfortable chair in the room, carefully chosen in
the obscure hope of somehow deprecating the wrath of the higher powers.
The Savage meanwhile wandered restlessly round the room, peering with a
vague superficial inquisitiveness at the books in the shelves, at the sound- track
rolls and reading machine bobbins in their numbered pigeon-holes. On the
table under the window lay a massive volume bound in limp black leather-
surrogate, and stamped with large golden T’s. He picked it up and opened
it. MY LIFE AND WORK, BY OUR FORD. The book had been published at
Detroit by the Society for the Propagation of Fordian Knowledge. Idly he turned
the pages, read a sentence here, a paragraph there, and had just come to the
conclusion that the book didn’t interest him, when the door opened, and the
Resident World Controller for Western Europe walked briskly into the room.
Mustapha Mond shook hands with all three of them; but it was to the Savage
that he addressed himself. “So you don’t much like civilization, Mr. Savage,”
he said.
The Savage looked at him. He had been prepared to lie, to bluster, to remain
sullenly unresponsive; but, reassured by the good-humoured intelligence of the
Controller’s face, he decided to tell the truth, straightforwardly. “No.” He sho-
ok his head.




                                         149
150                                                                        IDPH


Bernard started and looked horrified. What would the Controller think? To
be labelled as the friend of a man who said that he didn’t like civilization-said
it openly and, of all people, to the Controller-it was terrible. “But, John,” he
began. A look from Mustapha Mond reduced him to an abject silence.
“Of course,” the Savage went on to admit, “there are some very nice things. All
that music in the air, for instance .”
“Sometimes a thousand twangling instruments will hum about my ears and
sometimes voices.”
The Savage’s face lit up with a sudden pleasure. “Have you read it too?” he
asked. “I thought nobody knew about that book here, in England.”
“Almost nobody. I’m one of the very few. It’s prohibited, you see. But as
I make the laws here, I can also break them. With impunity, Mr. Marx,” he
added, turning to Bernard. “Which I’m afraid you can’t do.”
Bernard sank into a yet more hopeless misery.
“But why is it prohibited?” asked the Savage. In the excitement of meeting a
man who had read Shakespeare he had momentarily forgotten everything else.
The Controller shrugged his shoulders. “Because it’s old; that’s the chief reason.
We haven’t any use for old things here.”
“Even when they’re beautiful?”
“Particularly when they’re beautiful. Beauty’s attractive, and we don’t want
people to be attracted by old things. We want them to like the new ones.”
“But the new ones are so stupid and horrible. Those plays, where there’s
nothing but helicopters flying about and you feel the people kissing.” He ma-
de a grimace. “Goats and monkeys!” Only in Othello’s word could he find an
adequate vehicle for his contempt and hatred.
“Nice tame animals, anyhow,” the Controller murmured parenthetically.
“Why don’t you let them see Othello instead?”
“I’ve told you; it’s old. Besides, they couldn’t understand it.”
Yes, that was true. He remembered how Helmholtz had laughed at Romeo and
Juliet. “Well then,” he said, after a pause, “something new that’s like Othello,
and that they could understand.”
“That’s what we’ve all been wanting to write,” said Helmholtz, breaking a long
silence.
“And it’s what you never will write,” said the Controller. “Because, if it were
really like Othello nobody could understand it, however new it might be. And


                               http://www.idph.net
IDPH                                                                            151


if were new, it couldn’t possibly be like Othello.”
“Why not?”
“Yes, why not?” Helmholtz repeated. He too was forgetting the unpleasant
realities of the situation. Green with anxiety and apprehension, only Bernard
remembered them; the others ignored him. “Why not?”
“Because our world is not the same as Othello’s world. You can’t make fliv-
vers without steel-and you can’t make tragedies without social instability. The
world’s stable now. People are happy; they get what they want, and they never
want what they can’t get. They’re well off; they’re safe; they’re never ill; they’re
not afraid of death; they’re blissfully ignorant of passion and old age; they’re
plagued with no mothers or fathers; they’ve got no wives, or children, or lovers
to feel strongly about; they’re so conditioned that they practically can’t help
behaving as they ought to behave. And if anything should go wrong, there’s
soma. Which you go and chuck out of the window in the name of liberty, Mr.
Savage. Liberty!” He laughed. “Expecting Deltas to know what liberty is! And
now expecting them to understand Othello! My good boy!”
The Savage was silent for a little. “All the same,” he insisted obstinately, “Othel-
lo’s good, Othello’s better than those feelies.”
“Of course it is,” the Controller agreed. “But that’s the price we have to pay for
stability. You’ve got to choose between happiness and what people used to call
high art. We’ve sacrificed the high art. We have the feelies and the scent organ
instead.”
“But they don’t mean anything.”
“They mean themselves; they mean a lot of agreeable sensations to the audien-
ce.”
“But they’re. they’re told by an idiot.”
The Controller laughed. “You’re not being very polite to your friend, Mr. Wat-
son. One of our most distinguished Emotional Engineers .”
“But he’s right,” said Helmholtz gloomily. “Because it is idiotic. Writing when
there’s nothing to say .”
“Precisely. But that require the most enormous ingenuity. You’re making fiiv-
vers out of the absolute minimum of steel-works of art out of practically nothing
but pure sensation.”
The Savage shook his head. “It all seems to me quite horrible.”
“Of course it does. Actual happiness always looks pretty squalid in compari-
son with the over-compensations for misery. And, of course, stability isn’t ne-



                                http://www.idph.net
152                                                                        IDPH


arly so spectacular as instability. And being contented has none of the glamour
of a good fight against misfortune, none of the picturesqueness of a struggle
with temptation, or a fatal overthrow by passion or doubt. Happiness is never
grand.”
“I suppose not,” said the Savage after a silence. “But need it be quite so bad
as those twins?” He passed his hand over his eyes as though he were trying to
wipe away the remembered image of those long rows of identical midgets at the
assembling tables, those queued-up twin-herds at the entrance to the Brentford
monorail station, those human maggots swarming round Linda’s bed of death,
the endlessly repeated face of his assailants. He looked at his bandaged left
hand and shuddered. “Horrible!”
“But how useful! I see you don’t like our Bokanovsky Groups; but, I assure
you, they’re the foundation on which everything else is built. They’re the gy-
roscope that stabilizes the rocket plane of state on its unswerving course.” The
deep voice thrillingly vibrated; the gesticulating hand implied all space and the
onrush of the irresistible machine. Mustapha Mond’s oratory was almost up to
synthetic standards.
“I was wondering,” said the Savage, “why you had them at all-seeing that you
can get whatever you want out of those bottles. Why don’t you make every-
body an Alpha Double Plus while you’re about it?”
Mustapha Mond laughed. “Because we have no wish to have our throats cut,”
he answered. “We believe in happiness and stability. A society of Alphas
couldn’t fail to be unstable and miserable. Imagine a factory staffed by Alphas-
that is to say by separate and unrelated individuals of good heredity and condi-
tioned so as to be capable (within limits) of making a free choice and assuming
responsibilities. Imagine it!” he repeated.
The Savage tried to imagine it, not very successfully.
“It’s an absurdity. An Alpha-decanted, Alpha-conditioned man would go mad
if he had to do Epsilon Semi-Moron work-go mad, or start smashing things up.
Alphas can be completely socialized-but only on condition that you make them
do Alpha work. Only an Epsilon can be expected to make Epsilon sacrifices,
for the good reason that for him they aren’t sacrifices; they’re the line of least
resistance. His conditioning has laid down rails along which he’s got to run.
He can’t help himself; he’s foredoomed. Even after decanting, he’s still inside
a bottle-an invisible bottle of infantile and embryonic fixations. Each one of
us, of course,” the Controller meditatively continued, “goes through life inside
a bottle. But if we happen to be Alphas, our bottles are, relatively speaking,
enormous. We should suffer acutely if we were confined in a narrower space.
You cannot pour upper-caste champagne-surrogate into lower-caste bottles. It’s
obvious theoretically. But it has also been proved in actual practice. The result



                               http://www.idph.net
IDPH                                                                            153


of the Cyprus experiment was convincing.”
“What was that?” asked the Savage.
Mustapha Mond smiled. “Well, you can call it an experiment in rebottling if
you like. It began in A.F. 473. The Controllers had the island of Cyprus cle-
ared of all its existing inhabitants and re-colonized with a specially prepared
batch of twenty-two thousand Alphas. All agricultural and industrial equip-
ment was handed over to them and they were left to manage their own affairs.
The result exactly fulfilled all the theoretical prediotions. The land wasn’t pro-
perly worked; there were strikes in all the factories; the laws were set at naught,
orders disobeyed; all the people detailed for a spell of low-grade work were
perpetually intriguing for high- grade jobs, and all the people with high-grade
jobs were counter-intriguing at all costs to stay where they were. Within six
years they were having a first-class civil war. When nineteen out of the twenty-
two thousand had been killed, the survivors unanimously petitioned the World
Controllers to resume the government of the island. Which they did. And that
was the end of the only society of Alphas that the world has ever seen.”
The Savage sighed, profoundly.
“The optimum population,” said Mustapha Mond, “is modelled on the iceberg-
eight-ninths below the water line, one-ninth above.”
“And they’re happy below the water line?”
“Happier than above it. Happier than your friend here, for example.” He poin-
ted.
“In spite of that awful work?”
“Awful? They don’t find it so. On the contrary, they like it. It’s light, it’s chil-
dishly simple. No strain on the mind or the muscles. Seven and a half hours of
mild, unexhausting labour, and then the soma ration and games and unrestric-
ted copulation and the feelies. What more can they ask for? True,” he added,
“they might ask for shorter hours. And of course we could give them shor-
ter hours. Technically, it would be perfectly simple to reduce all lower-caste
working hours to three or four a day. But would they be any the happier for
that? No, they wouldn’t. The experiment was tried, more than a century and
a half ago. The whole of Ireland was put on to the four-hour day. What was
the result? Unrest and a large increase in the consumption of soma; that was
all. Those three and a half hours of extra leisure were so far from being a source
of happiness, that people felt constrained to take a holiday from them. The In-
ventions Office is stuffed with plans for labour-saving processes. Thousands of
them.” Mustapha Mond made a lavish gesture. “And why don’t we put them
into execution? For the sake of the labourers; it would be sheer cruelty to afflict
them with excessive leisure. It’s the same with agriculture. We could synthesize



                                 http://www.idph.net
154                                                                         IDPH


every morsel of food, if we wanted to. But we don’t. We prefer to keep a third
of the population on the land. For their own sakes-because it takes longer to
get food out of the land than out of a factory. Besides, we have our stability to
think of. We don’t want to change. Every change is a menace to stability. That’s
another reason why we’re so chary of applying new inventions. Every disco-
very in pure science is potentially subversive; even science must sometimes be
treated as a possible enemy. Yes, even science.”
Science? The Savage frowned. He knew the word. But what it exactly signi-
fied he could not say. Shakespeare and the old men of the pueblo had never
mentioned science, and from Linda he had only gathered the vaguest hints: sci-
ence was something you made helicopters with, some thing that caused you
to laugh at the Corn Dances, something that prevented you from being wrin-
kled and losing your teeth. He made a desperate effort to take the Controller’s
meaning.
“Yes,” Mustapha Mond was saying, “that’s another item in the cost of stability.
It isn’t only art that’s incompatible with happiness; it’s also science. Science is
dangerous; we have to keep it most carefully chained and muzzled.”
“What?” said Helmholtz, in astonishment. “But we’re always saying that sci-
ence is everything. It’s a hypnopædic platitude.”
“Three times a week between thirteen and seventeen,” put in Bemard.
“And all the science propaganda we do at the College .”
“Yes; but what sort of science?” asked Mustapha Mond sarcastically. “You’ve
had no scientific training, so you can’t judge. I was a pretty good physicist in
my time. Too good-good enough to realize that all our science is just a cookery
book, with an orthodox theory of cooking that nobody’s allowed to question,
and a list of recipes that mustn’t be added to except by special permission from
the head cook. I’m the head cook now. But I was an inquisitive young scullion
once. I started doing a bit of cooking on my own. Unorthodox cooking, illicit
cooking. A bit of real science, in fact.” He was silent.
“What happened?” asked Helmholtz Watson.
The Controller sighed. “Very nearly what’s going to happen to you young men.
I was on the point of being sent to an island.”
The words galvanized Bernard into violent and unseemly activity. “Send me
to an island?” He jumped up, ran across the room, and stood gesticulating in
front of the Controller. “You can’t send me. I haven’t done anything. lt was
the others. I swear it was the others.” He pointed accusingly to Helmholtz
and the Savage. “Oh, please don’t send me to Iceland. I promise I’ll do what
I ought to do. Give me another chance. Please give me another chance.” The



                               http://www.idph.net
IDPH                                                                            155


tears began to flow. “I tell you, it’s their fault,” he sobbed. “And not to Iceland.
Oh please, your fordship, please .” And in a paroxysm of abjection he threw
himself on his knees before the Controller. Mustapha Mond tried to make him
get up; but Bernard persisted in his grovelling; the stream of words poured out
inexhaustibly. In the end the Controller had to ring for his fourth secretary.
“Bring three men,” he ordered, “and take Mr. Marx into a bedroom. Give him
a good soma vaporization and then put him to bed and leave him.”
The fourth secretary went out and returned with three green-uniformed twin
footmen. Still shouting and sobbing. Bernard was carried out.
“One would think he was going to have his throat cut,” said the Controller, as
the door closed. “Whereas, if he had the smallest sense, he’d understand that
his punishment is really a reward. He’s being sent to an island. That’s to say,
he’s being sent to a place where he’ll meet the most interesting set of men and
women to be found anywhere in the world. All the people who, for one reason
or another, have got too self-consciously individual to fit into community-life.
All the people who aren’t satisfied with orthodoxy, who’ve got independent
ideas of their own. Every one, in a word, who’s any one. I almost envy you, Mr.
Watson.”
Helmholtz laughed. “Then why aren’t you on an island yourself?”
“Because, finally, I preferred this,” the Controller answered. “I was given the
choice: to be sent to an island, where I could have got on with my pure science,
or to be taken on to the Controllers’ Council with the prospect of succeeding in
due course to an actual Controllership. I chose this and let the science go.” After
a little silence, “Sometimes,” he added, “I rather regret the science. Happiness
is a hard master-particularly other people’s happiness. A much harder master,
if one isn’t conditioned to accept it unquestioningly, than truth.” He sighed,
fell silent again, then continued in a brisker tone, “Well, duty’s duty. One can’t
consult one’s own preference. I’m interested in truth, I like science. But truth’s
a menace, science is a public danger. As dangerous as it’s been beneficent. It
has given us the stablest equilibrium in history. China’s was hopelessly inse-
cure by comparison; even the primitive matriarchies weren’t steadier than we
are. Thanks, l repeat, to science. But we can’t allow science to undo its own
good work. That’s why we so carefully limit the scope of its researches-that’s
why I almost got sent to an island. We don’t allow it to deal with any but the
most immediate problems of the moment. All other enquiries are most sedu-
lously discouraged. It’s curious,” he went on after a little pause, “to read what
people in the time of Our Ford used to write about scientific progress. They
seemed to have imagined that it could be allowed to go on indefinitely, regar-
dless of everything else. Knowledge was the highest good, truth the supreme
value; all the rest was secondary and subordinate. True, ideas were beginning



                                http://www.idph.net
156                                                                        IDPH


to change even then. Our Ford himself did a great deal to shift the emphasis
from truth and beauty to comfort and happiness. Mass production demanded
the shift. Universal happiness keeps the wheels steadily turning; truth and be-
auty can’t. And, of course, whenever the masses seized political power, then
it was happiness rather than truth and beauty that mattered. Still, in spite of
everytung, unrestricted scientific research was still permitted. People still went
on talking about truth and beauty as though they were the sovereign goods.
Right up to the time of the Nine Years’ War. That made them change their tune
all right. What’s the point of truth or beauty or knowledge when the anthrax
bombs are popping all around you? That was when science first began to be
controlled-after the Nine Years’ War. People were ready to have even their ap-
petites controlled then. Anything for a quiet life. We’ve gone on controlling
ever since. It hasn’t been very good for truth, of course. But it’s been very good
for happiness. One can’t have something for nothing. Happiness has got to be
paid for. You’re paying for it, Mr. Watson-paying because you happen to be too
much interested in beauty. I was too much interested in truth; I paid too.”
“But you didn’t go to an island,” said the Savage, breaking a long silence.
The Controller smiled. “That’s how I paid. By choosing to serve happiness.
Other people’s-not mine. It’s lucky,” he added, after a pause, “that there are
such a lot of islands in the world. I don’t know what we should do without
them. Put you all in the lethal chamber, I suppose. By the way, Mr. Watson,
would you like a tropical climate? The Marquesas, for example; or Samoa? Or
something rather more bracing?”
Helmholtz rose from his pneumatic chair. “I should like a thoroughly bad cli-
mate,” he answered. “I believe one would write better if the climate were bad.
If there were a lot of wind and storms, for example .”
The Controller nodded his approbation. “I like your spirit, Mr. Watson. I like it
very much indeed. As much as I officially disapprove of it.” He smiled. “What
about the Falkland Islands?”
“Yes, I think that will do,” Helmholtz answered. “And now, if you don’t mind,
I’ll go and see how poor Bernard’s getting on.”




                               http://www.idph.net
Seventeen

ART, SCIENCE-you seem to have paid a fairly high price for your happiness,”
said the Savage, when they were alone. “Anything else?”
“Well, religion, of course,” replied the Controller. “There used to be something
called God-before the Nine Years’ War. But I was forgetting; you know all about
God, I suppose.”
“Well .” The Savage hesitated. He would have liked to say something about
solitude, about night, about the mesa lying pale under the moon, about the
precipice, the plunge into shadowy darkness, about death. He would have
liked to speak; but there were no words. Not even in Shakespeare.
The Controller, meanwhile, had crossed to the other side of the room and was
unlocking a large safe set into the wall between the bookshelves. The heavy
door swung open. Rummaging in the darkness within, “It’s a subject,” he said,
“that has always had a great interest for me.” He pulled out a thick black volu-
me. “You’ve never read this, for example.”
The Savage took it. “The Holy Bible, containing the Old and New Testaments,”
he read aloud from the title-page.
“Nor this.” It was a small book and had lost its cover.
“The Imitation of Christ.”
“Nor this.” He handed out another volume.
“The Varieties of Religious Experience. By William James.”
“And I’ve got plenty more,” Mustapha Mond continued, resuming his seat. “A
whole collection of pornographic old books. God in the safe and Ford on the
shelves.” He pointed with a laugh to his avowed library-to the shelves of books,
the rack full of reading-machine bobbins and sound-track rolls.
“But if you know about God, why don’t you tell them?” asked the Savage
indignantly. “Why don’t you give them these books about God?”


                                      157
158                                                                         IDPH


“For the same reason as we don’t give them Othello: they’re old; they’re about
God hundreds of years ago. Not about God now.”
“But God doesn’t change.”
“Men do, though.”
“What difference does that make?”
“All the difference in the world,” said Mustapha Mond. He got up again and
walked to the safe. “There was a man called Cardinal Newman,” he said.
“A cardinal,” he exclaimed parenthetically, “was a kind of Arch-Community-
Songster.”
“’I Pandulph, of fair Milan, cardinal.’ I’ve read about them in Shakespeare.”
“Of course you have. Well, as I was saying, there was a man called Cardinal
Newman. Ah, here’s the book.” He pulled it out. “And while I’m about it I’ll
take this one too. It’s by a man called Maine de Biran. He was a philosopher, if
you know what that was.”
“A man who dreams of fewer things than there are in heaven and earth,” said
the Savage promptly.
“Quite so. I’ll read you one of the things he did dream of in a moment. Me-
anwhile, listen to what this old Arch-Community-Songster said.” He opened
the book at the place marked by a slip of paper and began to read. “’We are
not our own any more than what we possess is our own. We did not make
ourselves, we cannot be supreme over ourselves. We are not our own masters.
We are God’s property. Is it not our happiness thus to view the matter? Is it
any happiness or any comfort, to consider that we are our own? It may be
thought so by the young and prosperous. These may think it a great thing to
have everything, as they suppose, their own way-to depend on no one-to ha-
ve to think of nothing out of sight, to be without the irksomeness of continual
acknowledgment, continual prayer, continual reference of what they do to the
will of another. But as time goes on, they, as all men, will find that independen-
ce was not made for man-that it is an unnatural state- will do for a while, but
will not carry us on safely to the end .”’ Mustapha Mond paused, put down
the first book and, picking up the other, turned over the pages. “Take this, for
example,” he said, and in his deep voice once more began to read: “’A man
grows old; he feels in himself that radical sense of weakness, of listlessness, of
discomfort, which accompanies the advance of age; and, feeling thus, imagines
himself merely sick, lulling his fears with the notion that this distressing condi-
tion is due to some particular cause, from which, as from an illness, he hopes to
recover. Vain imaginings! That sickness is old age; and a horrible disease it is.
They say that it is the fear of death and of what comes after death that makes
men turn to religion as they advance in years. But my own experience has gi-



                               http://www.idph.net
IDPH                                                                            159


ven me the conviction that, quite apart from any such terrors or imaginings, the
religious sentiment tends to develop as we grow older; to develop because, as
the passions grow calm, as the fancy and sensibilities are less excited and less
excitable, our reason becomes less troubled in its working, less obscured by the
images, desires and distractions, in which it used to be absorbed; whereupon
God emerges as from behind a cloud; our soul feels, sees, turns towards the
source of all light; turns naturally and inevitably; for now that all that gave to
the world of sensations its life and charms has begun to leak away from us, now
that phenomenal existence is no more bolstered up by impressions from within
or from without, we feel the need to lean on something that abides, something
that will never play us false-a reality, an absolute and everlasting truth. Yes, we
inevitably turn to God; for this religious sentiment is of its nature so pure, so
delightful to the soul that experiences it, that it makes up to us for all our other
losses.”’ Mustapha Mond shut the book and leaned back in his chair. “One of
the numerous things in heaven and earth that these philosophers didn’t dream
about was this” (he waved his hand), “us, the modern world. ’You can only
be independent of God while you’ve got youth and prosperity; independence
won’t take you safely to the end.’ Well, we’ve now got youth and prosperity
right up to the end. What follows? Evidently, that we can be independent of
God. ’The religious sentiment will compensate us for all our losses.’ But there
aren’t any losses for us to compensate; religious sentiment is superfluous. And
why should we go hunting for a substitute for youthful desires, when youthful
desires never fail? A substitute for distractions, when we go on enjoying all the
old fooleries to the very last? What need have we of repose when our minds
and bodies continue to delight in activity? of consolation, when we have soma?
of something immovable, when there is the social order?”
“Then you think there is no God?”
“No, I think there quite probably is one.”
“Then why? .”
Mustapha Mond checked him. “But he manifests himself in different ways to
different men. In premodern times he manifested himself as the being that’s
described in these books. Now .”
“How does he manifest himself now?” asked the Savage.
“Well, he manifests himself as an absence; as though he weren’t there at all.”
“That’s your fault.”
“Call it the fault of civilization. God isn’t compatible with machinery and sci-
entific medicine and universal happiness. You must make your choice. Our
civilization has chosen machinery and medicine and happiness. That’s why I
have to keep these books locked up in the safe. They’re smut. People would be



                                http://www.idph.net
160                                                                         IDPH


shocked it .”
The Savage interrupted him. “But isn’t it natural to feel there’s a God?”
“You might as well ask if it’s natural to do up one’s trousers with zippers,” said
the Controller sarcastically. “You remind me of another of those old fellows
called Bradley. He defined philosophy as the finding of bad reason for what
one believes by instinct. As if one believed anything by instinct! One believes
things because one has been conditioned to believe them. Finding bad reasons
for what one believes for other bad reasons-that’s philosophy. People believe in
God because they’ve been conditioned to.
“But all the same,” insisted the Savage, “it is natural to believe in God when
you’re alone-quite alone, in the night, thinking about death .”
“But people never are alone now,” said Mustapha Mond. “We make them hate
solitude; and we arrange their lives so that it’s almost impossible for them ever
to have it.”
The Savage nodded gloomily. At Malpais he had suffered because they had
shut him out from the communal activities of the pueblo, in civilized London
he was suffering because he could never escape from those communal activities,
never be quietly alone.
“Do you remember that bit in King Lear?” said the Savage at last. “’The gods
are just and of our pleasant vices make instruments to plague us; the dark and
vicious place where thee he got cost him his eyes,’ and Edmund answers-you
remember, he’s wounded, he’s dying-’Thou hast spoken right; ’tis true. The
wheel has come full circle; I am here.’ What about that now? Doesn’t there
seem to be a God managing things, punishing, rewarding?”
“Well, does there?” questioned the Controller in his turn. “You can indulge in
any number of pleasant vices with a freemartin and run no risks of having your
eyes put out by your son’s mistress. ’The wheel has come full circle; I am here.’
But where would Edmund be nowadays? Sitting in a pneumatic chair, with
his arm round a girl’s waist, sucking away at his sex- hormone chewing-gum
and looking at the feelies. The gods are just. No doubt. But their code of law
is dictated, in the last resort, by the people who organize society; Providence
takes its cue from men.”
“Are you sure?” asked the Savage. “Are you quite sure that the Edmund in that
pneumatic chair hasn’t been just as heavily punished as the Edmund who’s
wounded and bleeding to death? The gods are just. Haven’t they used his
pleasant vices as an instrument to degrade him?”
“Degrade him from what position? As a happy, hard-working, goods-
consuming citizen he’s perfect. Of course, if you choose some other standard



                               http://www.idph.net
IDPH                                                                           161


than ours, then perhaps you might say he was degraded. But you’ve got to stick
to one set of postulates. You can’t play Electro-magnetic Golf according to the
rules of Centrifugal Bumble-puppy.”
“But value dwells not in particular will,” said the Savage. “It holds his estimate
and dignity as well wherein ’tis precious of itself as in the prizer.”
“Come, come,” protested Mustapha Mond, “that’s going rather far, isn’t it?”
“If you allowed yourselves to think of God, you wouldn’t allow yourselves to
be degraded by pleasant vices. You’d have a reason for bearing things patiently,
for doing things with courage. I’ve seen it with the Indians.”
“l’m sure you have,” said Mustapha Mond. “But then we aren’t Indians. There
isn’t any need for a civilized man to bear anything that’s seriously unpleasant.
And as for doing things-Ford forbid that he should get the idea into his head. It
would upset the whole social order if men started doing things on their own.”
“What about self-denial, then? If you had a God, you’d have a reason for self-
denial.”
“But industrial civilization is only possible when there’s no self-denial. Self-
indulgence up to the very limits imposed by hygiene and economics. Otherwise
the wheels stop turning.”
“You’d have a reason for chastity!” said the Savage, blushing a little as he spoke
the words.
“But chastity means passion, chastity means neurasthenia. And passion and
neurasthenia mean instability. And instability means the end of civilization.
You can’t have a lasting civilization without plenty of pleasant vices.”
“But God’s the reason for everything noble and fine and heroic. If you had a
God .”
“My dear young friend,” said Mustapha Mond, “civilization has absolutely no
need of nobility or heroism. These things are symptoms of political ineffici-
ency. In a properly organized society like ours, nobody has any opportunities
for being noble or heroic. Conditions have got to be thoroughly unstable before
the occasion can arise. Where there are wars, where there are divided allegi-
ances, where there are temptations to be resisted, objects of love to be fought
for or defended-there, obviously, nobility and heroism have some sense. But
there aren’t any wars nowadays. The greatest care is taken to prevent you from
loving any one too much. There’s no such thing as a divided allegiance; you’re
so conditioned that you can’t help doing what you ought to do. And what you
ought to do is on the whole so pleasant, so many of the natural impulses are
allowed free play, that there really aren’t any temptations to resist. And if ever,
by some unlucky chance, anything unpleasant should somehow happen, why,


                               http://www.idph.net
162                                                                        IDPH


there’s always soma to give you a holiday from the facts. And there’s always
soma to calm your anger, to reconcile you to your enemies, to make you pati-
ent and long-suffering. In the past you could only accomplish these things by
making a great effort and after years of hard moral training. Now, you swallow
two or three half-gramme tablets, and there you are. Anybody can be virtuous
now. You can carry at least half your mortality about in a bottle. Christianity
without tears-that’s what soma is.”
“But the tears are necessary. Don’t you remember what Othello said? ’If after
every tempest came such calms, may the winds blow till they have wakened
death.’ There’s a story one of the old Indians used to tell us, about the Girl of
Mátaski. The young men who wanted to marry her had to do a morning’s ho-
eing in her garden. It seemed easy; but there were flies and mosquitoes, magic
ones. Most of the young men simply couldn’t stand the biting and stinging. But
the one that could-he got the girl.”
“Charming! But in civilized countries,” said the Controller, “you can have girls
without hoeing for them, and there aren’t any flies or mosquitoes to sting you.
We got rid of them all centuries ago.”
The Savage nodded, frowning. “You got rid of them. Yes, that’s just like you.
Getting rid of everytfung unpleasant instead of learning to put up with it.
Whether ’tis better in the mind to suffer the slings and arrows of outrageous
fortune, or to take arms against a sea of troubles and by opposing end them.
But you don’t do either. Neither suffer nor oppose. You just abolish the slings
and arrows. It’s too easy.”
He was suddenly silent, thinking of his mother. In her room on the thirty- se-
venth floor, Linda had floated in a sea of singing lights and perfumed caresses-
floated away, out of space, out of time, out of the prison of her memories, her
habits, her aged and bloated body. And Tomakin, ex-Director of Hatcheries
and Conditioning, Tomakin was still on holiday-on holiday from humiliation
and pain, in a world where he could not hear those words, that derisive laugh-
ter, could not see that hideous face, feel those moist and flabby arms round his
neck, in a beautiful world.
“What you need,” the Savage went on, “is something with tears for a change.
Nothing costs enough here.”
(“Twelve and a half million dollars,” Henry Foster had protested when the Sa-
vage told him that. “Twelve and a half million-that’s what the new Conditio-
ning Centre cost. Not a cent less.”)
“Exposing what is mortal and unsure to all that fortune, death and danger dare,
even for an eggshell. Isn’t there something in that?” he asked, looking up at
Mustapha Mond. “Quite apart from God-though of course God would be a



                              http://www.idph.net
IDPH                                                                            163


reason for it. Isn’t there something in living dangerously?”
“There’s a great deal in it,” the Controller replied. “Men and women must have
their adrenals stimulated from time to time.”
“What?” questioned the Savage, uncomprehending.
“It’s one of the conditions of perfect health. That’s why we’ve made the V.P.S.
treatments compulsory.”
“V.P.S.?”
“Violent Passion Surrogate. Regularly once a month. We flood the whole sys-
tem with adrenin. It’s the complete physiological equivalent of fear and rage.
All the tonic effects of murdering Desdemona and being murdered by Othello,
without any of the inconveniences.”
“But I like the inconveniences.”
“We don’t,” said the Controller. “We prefer to do things comfortably.”
“But I don’t want comfort. I want God, I want poetry, I want real danger, I want
freedom, I want goodness. I want sin.”
“In fact,” said Mustapha Mond, “you’re claiming the right to be unhappy.”
“All right then,” said the Savage defiantly, “I’m claiming the nght to be
unhappy.”
“Not to mention the right to grow old and ugly and impotent; the right to have
syphilis and cancer; the right to have too little to eat; the right to be lousy; the
right to live in constant apprehension of what may happen to- morrow; the
right to catch typhoid; the right to be tortured by unspeakable pains of every
kind.” There was a long silence.
“I claim them all,” said the Savage at last.
Mustapha Mond shrugged his shoulders. “You’re welcome,” he said.




                                http://www.idph.net
