THE ELEMENTS OF ENJOYMENT
The first surprise we encountered in our study was how similarly very
different activities were described when they were going especially well.
Apparently the way a long-distance swimmer felt when crossing the
English Channel was almost identical to the way a chess player felt during a
tournament or a climber progressing up a difficult rock face. All these
feelings were shared, in important respects, by subjects ranging from
musicians composing a new quartet to teenagers from the ghetto involved in
a championship basketball game.

    The second surprise was that, regardless of culture, stage of
modernization, social class, age, or gender, the respondents described
enjoyment in very much the same way. What they did to experience
enjoyment varied enormously—the elderly Koreans liked to meditate, the
teenage Japanese liked to swarm around in motorcycle gangs—but they
described how it felt when they enjoyed themselves in almost identical
terms. Moreover, the reasons the activity was enjoyed shared many more
similarities than differences. In sum, optimal experience, and the
psychological conditions that make it possible, seem to be the same the
world over.

    As our studies have suggested, the phenomenology of enjoyment has
eight major components. When people reflect on how it feels when their
experience is most positive, they mention at least one, and often all, of the
following. First, the experience usually occurs when we confront tasks we
have a chance of completing. Second, we must be able to concentrate on
what we are doing. Third and fourth, the concentration is usually possible
because the task undertaken has clear goals and provides immediate
feedback. Fifth, one acts with a deep but effortless involvement that
removes from awareness the worries and frustrations of everyday life.
Sixth, enjoyable experiences allow people to exercise a sense of control
over their actions. Seventh, concern for the self disappears, yet
paradoxically the sense of self emerges stronger after the flow experience is
over. Finally, the sense of the duration of time is altered; hours pass by in
minutes, and minutes can stretch out to seem like hours. The combination
of all these elements causes a sense of deep enjoyment that is so rewarding
people feel that expending a great deal of energy is worthwhile simply to be
able to feel it.

    We shall take a closer look at each of these elements so that we may
better understand what makes enjoyable activities so gratifying. With this
knowledge, it is possible to achieve control of consciousness and turn even
the most humdrum moments of everyday lives into events that help the self
grow.

    A Challenging Activity That Requires Skills

    Sometimes a person reports having an experience of extreme joy, a
feeling of ecstasy for no apparent good reason: a bar of haunting music may
trigger it, or a wonderful view, or even less—just a spontaneous sense of
well-being. But by far the overwhelming proportion of optimal experiences
are reported to occur within sequences of activities that are goal-directed
and bounded by rules—activities that require the investment of psychic
energy, and that could not be done without the appropriate skills. Why this
should be so will become clear as we go along; at this point it is sufficient
to note that this seems to be universally the case.

    It is important to clarify at the outset that an “activity” need not be
active in the physical sense, and the “skill” necessary to engage in it need
not be a physical skill. For instance, one of the most frequently mentioned
enjoyable activities the world over is reading. Reading is an activity
because it requires the concentration of attention and has a goal, and to do it
one must know the rules of written language. The skills involved in reading
include not only literacy but also the ability to translate words into images,
to empathize with fictional characters, to recognize historical and cultural
contexts, to anticipate turns of the plot, to criticize and evaluate the author’s
style, and so on. In this broader sense, any capacity to manipulate symbolic
information is a “skill,” such as the skill of the mathematician to shape
quantitative relationships in his head, or the skill of the musician in
combining musical notes.
    Another universally enjoyable activity is being with other people.
Socializing might at first sight appear to be an exception to the statement
that one needs to use skills to enjoy an activity, for it does not seem that
gossiping or joking around with another person requires particular abilities.
But of course, it does; as so many shy people know, if a person feels self-
conscious, he or she will dread establishing informal contacts, and avoid
company whenever possible.

    Any activity contains a bundle of opportunities for action, or
“challenges,” that require appropriate skills to realize. For those who don’t
have the right skills, the activity is not challenging; it is simply
meaningless. Setting up a chessboard gets the juices of a chess player
flowing, but leaves cold anyone who does not know the rules of the game.
To most people, the sheer wall of El Capitan in Yosemite valley is just a
huge chunk of featureless rock. But to the climber it is an arena offering an
endlessly complex symphony of mental and physical challenges.

     One simple way to find challenges is to enter a competitive situation.
Hence the great appeal of all games and sports that pit a person or team
against another. In many ways, competition is a quick way of developing
complexity: “He who wrestles with us,” wrote Edmund Burke, “strengthens
our nerves, and sharpens our skill. Our antagonist is our helper.” The
challenges of competition can be stimulating and enjoyable. But when
beating the opponent takes precedence in the mind over performing as well
as possible, enjoyment tends to disappear. Competition is enjoyable only
when it is a means to perfect one’s skills; when it becomes an end in itself,
it ceases to be fun.

    But challenges are by no means confined to competitive or to physical
activities. They are necessary to provide enjoyment even in situations where
one would not expect them to be relevant. For example, here is a quote
from one of our studies, of a statement made by an art expert describing the
enjoyment he takes in looking at a painting, something most people would
regard as an immediate, intuitive process: “A lot of pieces that you deal
with are very straightforward…and you don’t find anything exciting about
them, you know, but there are other pieces that have some sort of
challenge…. those are the pieces that stay in your mind, that are the most
interesting.” In other words, even the passive enjoyment one gets from
looking at a painting or sculpture depends on the challenges that the work
of art contains.

    Activities that provide enjoyment are often those that have been
designed for this very purpose. Games, sports, and artistic and literary
forms were developed over the centuries for the express purpose of
enriching life with enjoyable experiences. But it would be a mistake to
assume that only art and leisure can provide optimal experiences. In a
healthy culture, productive work and the necessary routines of everyday life
are also satisfying. In fact, one purpose of this book is to explore ways in
which even routine details can be transformed into personally meaningful
games that provide optimal experiences. Mowing the lawn or waiting in a
dentist’s office can become enjoyable provided one restructures the activity
by providing goals, rules, and the other elements of enjoyment to be
reviewed below.

     Heinz Maier-Leibnitz, the famous German experimental physicist and a
descendant of the eighteenth-century philosopher and mathematician,
provides an intriguing example of how one can take control of a boring
situation and turn it into a mildly enjoyable one. Professor Maier-Leibnitz
suffers from an occupational handicap common to academicians: having to
sit through endless, often boring conferences. To alleviate this burden he
invented a private activity that provides just enough challenges for him not
to be completely bored during a dull lecture, but is so automated that it
leaves enough attention free so that if something interesting is being said, it
will register in his awareness.

     What he does is this: Whenever a speaker begins to get tedious, he starts
to tap his right thumb once, then the third finger of the right hand, then the
index, then the fourth finger, then the third finger again, then the little finger
of the right hand. Then he moves to the left hand and taps the little finger,
the middle finger, the fourth finger, the index, and the middle finger again,
and ends with the thumb of the left hand. Then the right hand reverses the
sequence of fingering, followed by the reverse of the left hand’s sequence.
It turns out that by introducing full and half stops at regular intervals, there
are 888 combinations one can move through without repeating the same
pattern. By interspersing pauses among the taps at regular intervals, the
pattern acquires an almost musical harmony, and in fact it is easily
represented on a musical staff.

    After inventing this innocent game, Professor Maier-Leibnitz found an
interesting use for it: as a way of measuring the length of trains of thought.
The pattern of 888 taps, repeated three times, provides a set of 2,664 taps
that, with practice, takes almost exactly twelve minutes to perform. As soon
as he starts tapping, by shifting attention to his fingers, Professor Maier-
Leibnitz can tell exactly at what point he is in the sequence. So suppose that
a thought concerning one of his physics experiments appears in his
consciousness while he is tapping during a boring lecture. He immediately
shifts attention to his fingers, and registers the fact that he is at the 300th tap
of the second series; then in the same split second he returns to the train of
thought about the experiment. At a certain point the thought is completed,
and he has figured out the problem. How long did it take him to solve the
problem? By shifting attention back to his fingers, he notices that he is
about to finish the second series—the thought process has taken
approximately two and a quarter minutes to play itself out.

    Few people bother inventing quite such ingenious and complex
diversions to improve the quality of their experiences. But all of us have
more modest versions of the same. Everybody develops routines to fill in
the boring gaps of the day, or to bring experience back on an even keel
when anxiety threatens. Some people are compulsive doodlers, others chew
on things or smoke, smooth their hair, hum a tune, or engage in more
esoteric private rituals that have the same purpose: to impose order in
consciousness through the performance of patterned action. These are the
“microflow” activities that help us negotiate the doldrums of the day. But
how enjoyable an activity is depends ultimately on its complexity. The
small automatic games woven into the fabric of everyday life help reduce
boredom, but add little to the positive quality of experience. For that one
needs to face more demanding challenges, and use higher-level skills.

    In all the activities people in our study reported engaging in, enjoyment
comes at a very specific point: whenever the opportunities for action
perceived by the individual are equal to his or her capabilities. Playing
tennis, for instance, is not enjoyable if the two opponents are mismatched.
The less skilled player will feel anxious, and the better player will feel
bored. The same is true of every other activity: a piece of music that is too
simple relative to one’s listening skills will be boring, while music that is
too complex will be frustrating. Enjoyment appears at the boundary
between boredom and anxiety, when the challenges are just balanced with
the person’s capacity to act.

    The golden ratio between challenges and skills does not only hold true
for human activities. Whenever I took our hunting dog, Hussar, for a walk
in the open fields he liked to play a very simple game—the prototype of the
most culturally widespread game of human children, escape and pursuit. He
would run circles around me at top speed, with his tongue hanging out and
his eyes warily watching every move I made, daring me to catch him.
Occasionally I would take a lunge, and if I was lucky I got to touch him.
Now the interesting part is that whenever I was tired, and moved
halfheartedly, Hussar would run much tighter circles, making it relatively
easy for me to catch him; on the other hand, if I was in good shape and
willing to extend myself, he would enlarge the diameter of his circle. In this
way, the difficulty of the game was kept constant. With an uncanny sense
for the fine balancing of challenges and skills, he would make sure that the
game would yield the maximum of enjoyment for us both.

   The Merging of Action and Awareness

    When all a person’s relevant skills are needed to cope with the
challenges of a situation, that person’s attention is completely absorbed by
the activity. There is no excess psychic energy left over to process any
information but what the activity offers. All the attention is concentrated on
the relevant stimuli.

    As a result, one of the most universal and distinctive features of optimal
experience takes place: people become so involved in what they are doing
that the activity becomes spontaneous, almost automatic; they stop being
aware of themselves as separate from the actions they are performing.

   A dancer describes how it feels when a performance is going well:
“Your concentration is very complete. Your mind isn’t wandering, you are
not thinking of something else; you are totally involved in what you are
doing…. Your energy is flowing very smoothly. You feel relaxed,
comfortable, and energetic.”

    A rock climber explains how it feels when he is scaling a mountain:
“You are so involved in what you are doing [that] you aren’t thinking of
yourself as separate from the immediate activity…. You don’t see yourself
as separate from what you are doing.”

    A mother who enjoys the time spent with her small daughter: “Her
reading is the one thing that she’s really into, and we read together. She
reads to me, and I read to her, and that’s a time when I sort of lose touch
with the rest of the world, I’m totally absorbed in what I’m doing.”

    A chess player tells of playing in a tournament: “…the concentration is
like breathing—you never think of it. The roof could fall in and, if it missed
you, you would be unaware of it.”

    It is for this reason that we called the optimal experience “flow.” The
short and simple word describes well the sense of seemingly effortless
movement. The following words from a poet and rock climber apply to all
the thousands of interviews collected by us and by others over the years:
“The mystique of rock climbing is climbing; you get to the top of a rock
glad it’s over but really wish it would go on forever. The justification of
climbing is climbing, like the justification of poetry is writing; you don’t
conquer anything except things in yourself…. The act of writing justifies
poetry. Climbing is the same: recognizing that you are a flow. The purpose
of the flow is to keep on flowing, not looking for a peak or utopia but
staying in the flow. It is not a moving up but a continuous flowing; you
move up to keep the flow going. There is no possible reason for climbing
except the climbing itself; it is a self-communication.”

     Although the flow experience appears to be effortless, it is far from
being so. It often requires strenuous physical exertion, or highly disciplined
mental activity. It does not happen without the application of skilled
performance. Any lapse in concentration will erase it. And yet while it lasts
consciousness works smoothly, action follows action seamlessly. In normal
life, we keep interrupting what we do with doubts and questions. “Why am
I doing this? Should I perhaps be doing something else?” Repeatedly we
question the necessity of our actions, and evaluate critically the reasons for
carrying them out. But in flow there is no need to reflect, because the action
carries us forward as if by magic.

   Clear Goals and Feedback

    The reason it is possible to achieve such complete involvement in a
flow experience is that goals are usually clear, and feedback immediate. A
tennis player always knows what she has to do: return the ball into the
opponent’s court. And each time she hits the ball she knows whether she
has done well or not. The chess player’s goals are equally obvious: to mate
the opponent’s king before his own is mated. With each move, he can
calculate whether he has come closer to this objective. The climber inching
up a vertical wall of rock has a very simple goal in mind: to complete the
climb without falling. Every second, hour after hour, he receives
information that he is meeting that basic goal.

    Of course, if one chooses a trivial goal, success in it does not provide
enjoyment. If I set as my goal to remain alive while sitting on the living-
room sofa, I also could spend days knowing that I was achieving it, just as
the rock climber does. But this realization would not make me particularly
happy, whereas the climber’s knowledge brings exhilaration to his
dangerous ascent.

     Certain activities require a very long time to accomplish, yet the
components of goals and feedback are still extremely important to them.
One example was given by a sixty-two-year-old woman living in the Italian
Alps, who said her most enjoyable experiences were taking care of the cows
and tending the orchard: “I find special satisfaction in caring for the plants:
I like to see them grow day by day. It is very beautiful.” Although it
involves a period of patient waiting, seeing the plants one has cared for
grow provides a powerful feedback even in the urban apartments of
American cities.

     Another example is solo ocean cruising, in which a person alone might
sail for weeks in a small boat without seeing land. Jim Macbeth, who did a
study of flow in ocean cruising, comments on the excitement a sailor feels
when, after days of anxiously scanning the empty reaches of water, he
discerns the outline of the island he had been aiming for as it starts to rise
over the horizon. One of the legendary cruisers describes this sensation as
follows: “I…experienced a sense of satisfaction coupled with some
astonishment that my observations of the very distant sun from an unsteady
platform and the use of some simple tables…enable[d] a small island to be
found with certainty after an ocean crossing.” And another: “Each time, I
feel the same mixture of astonishment, love, and pride as this new land is
born which seems to have been created for me and by me.”

    The goals of an activity are not always as clear as those of tennis, and
the feedback is often more ambiguous than the simple “I am not falling”
information processed by the climber. A composer of music, for instance,
may know that he wishes to write a song, or a flute concerto, but other than
that, his goals are usually quite vague. And how does he know whether the
notes he is writing down are “right” or “wrong”? The same situation holds
true for the artist painting a picture, and for all activities that are creative or
open-ended in nature. But these are all exceptions that prove the rule: unless
a person learns to set goals and to recognize and gauge feedback in such
activities, she will not enjoy them.

    In some creative activities, where goals are not clearly set in advance, a
person must develop a strong personal sense of what she intends to do. The
artist might not have a visual image of what the finished painting should
look like, but when the picture has progressed to a certain point, she should
know whether this is what she wanted to achieve or not. And a painter who
enjoys painting must have internalized criteria for “good” or “bad” so that
after each brush stroke she can say: “Yes, this works; no, this doesn’t.”
Without such internal guidelines, it is impossible to experience flow.

    Sometimes the goals and the rules governing an activity are invented, or
negotiated on the spot. For example, teenagers enjoy impromptu
interactions in which they try to “gross each other out,” or tell tall stories, or
make fun of their teachers. The goal of such sessions emerges by trial and
error, and is rarely made explicit; often it remains below the participants’
level of awareness. Yet it is clear that these activities develop their own
rules and that those who take part have a clear idea of what constitutes a
successful “move,” and of who is doing well. In many ways this is the
pattern of a good jazz band, or any improvisational group. Scholars or
debaters obtain similar satisfaction when the “moves” in their arguments
mesh smoothly, and produce the desired result.

    What constitutes feedback varies considerably in different activities.
Some people are indifferent to things that others cannot get enough of. For
instance, surgeons who love doing operations claim that they wouldn’t
switch to internal medicine even if they were paid ten times as much as they
are for doing surgery, because an internist never knows exactly how well he
is doing. In an operation, on the other hand, the status of the patient is
almost always clear: as long as there is no blood in the incision, for
example, a specific procedure has been successful. When the diseased organ
is cut out, the surgeon’s task is accomplished; after that there is the suture
that gives a gratifying sense of closure to the activity. And the surgeon’s
disdain for psychiatry is even greater than that for internal medicine: to hear
surgeons talk, the psychiatrist might spend ten years with a patient without
knowing whether the cure is helping him.

    Yet the psychiatrist who enjoys his trade is also receiving constant
feedback: the way the patient holds himself, the expression on his face, the
hesitation in his voice, the content of the material he brings up in the
therapeutic hour—all these bits of information are important clues the
psychiatrist uses to monitor the progress of the therapy. The difference
between a surgeon and a psychiatrist is that the former considers blood and
excision the only feedback worth attending to, whereas the latter considers
the signals reflecting a patient’s state of mind to be significant information.
The surgeon judges the psychiatrist to be soft because he is interested in
such ephemeral goals; the psychiatrist thinks the surgeon crude for his
concentration on mechanics.

    The kind of feedback we work toward is in and of itself often
unimportant: What difference does it make if I hit the tennis ball between
the white lines, if I immobilize the enemy king on the chessboard, or if I
notice a glimmer of understanding in my patient’s eyes at the end of the
therapeutic hour? What makes this information valuable is the symbolic
message it contains: that I have succeeded in my goal. Such knowledge
creates order in consciousness, and strengthens the structure of the self.

    Almost any kind of feedback can be enjoyable, provided it is logically
related to a goal in which one has invested psychic energy. If I were to set
myself up to balance a walking stick on my nose, then the sight of the stick
wobbling upright above my face would provide a brief enjoyable interlude.
But each of us is temperamentally sensitive to a certain range of
information that we learn to value more than most other people do, and it is
likely that we will consider feedback involving that information to be more
relevant than others might.

    For instance, some people are born with exceptional sensitivity to
sound. They can discriminate among different tones and pitches, and
recognize and remember combinations of sounds better than the general
population. It is likely that such individuals will be attracted to playing with
sounds; they will learn to control and shape auditory information. For them
the most important feedback will consist in being able to combine sounds,
to produce or reproduce rhythms and melodies. Composers, singers,
performers, conductors, and music critics will develop from among them. In
contrast, some are genetically predisposed to be unusually sensitive to other
people, and they will learn to pay attention to the signals they send out. The
feedback they will be looking for is the expression of human emotion.
Some people have fragile selves that need constant reassurance, and for
them the only information that counts is winning in a competitive situation.
Others have invested so much in being liked that the only feedback they
take into account is approval and admiration.

    A good illustration of the importance of feedback is contained in the
responses of a group of blind religious women interviewed by Professor
Fausto Massimini’s team of psychologists in Milan, Italy. Like the other
respondents in our studies, they were asked to describe the most enjoyable
experiences in their lives. For these women, many of whom had been
sightless since birth, the most frequently mentioned flow experiences were
the result of reading books in Braille, praying, doing handicrafts like
knitting and binding books, and helping each other in case of sickness or
other need. Of the over six hundred people interviewed by the Italian team,
these blind women stressed more than anyone else the importance of
receiving clear feedback as a condition for enjoying whatever they were
doing. Unable to see what was going on around them, they needed to know
even more than sighted people whether what they were trying to accomplish
was actually coming to pass.

   Concentration on the Task at Hand

    One of the most frequently mentioned dimensions of the flow
experience is that, while it lasts, one is able to forget all the unpleasant
aspects of life. This feature of flow is an important by-product of the fact
that enjoyable activities require a complete focusing of attention on the task
at hand—thus leaving no room in the mind for irrelevant information.

    In normal everyday existence, we are the prey of thoughts and worries
intruding unwanted in consciousness. Because most jobs, and home life in
general, lack the pressing demands of flow experiences, concentration is
rarely so intense that preoccupations and anxieties can be automatically
ruled out. Consequently the ordinary state of mind involves unexpected and
frequent episodes of entropy interfering with the smooth run of psychic
energy. This is one reason why flow improves the quality of experience: the
clearly structured demands of the activity impose order, and exclude the
interference of disorder in consciousness.

    A professor of physics who was an avid rock climber described his state
of mind while climbing as follows: “It is as if my memory input has been
cut off. All I can remember is the last thirty seconds, and all I can think
ahead is the next five minutes.” In fact, any activity that requires
concentration has a similarly narrow window of time.

     But it is not only the temporal focus that counts. What is even more
significant is that only a very select range of information can be allowed
into awareness. Therefore all the troubling thoughts that ordinarily keep
passing through the mind are temporarily kept in abeyance. As a young
basketball player explains: “The court—that’s all that matters…. Sometimes
out on the court I think of a problem, like fighting with my steady girl, and I
think that’s nothing compared to the game. You can think about a problem
all day but as soon as you get in the game, the hell with it!” And another:
“Kids my age, they think a lot…but when you are playing basketball, that’s
all there is on your mind—just basketball…. Everything seems to follow
right along.”

   A mountaineer expands on the same theme: “When you’re [climbing]
you’re not aware of other problematic life situations. It becomes a world
unto its own, significant only to itself. It’s a concentration thing. Once
you’re into the situation, it’s incredibly real, and you’re very much in
charge of it. It becomes your total world.”

    A similar sensation is reported by a dancer: “I get a feeling that I don’t
get anywhere else…. I have more confidence in myself than any other time.
Maybe an effort to forget my problems. Dance is like therapy. If I am
troubled about something, I leave it out of the door as I go in [the dance
studio].”

    On a larger time scale, ocean cruising provides an equivalent merciful
oblivion: “But no matter how many little discomforts there may be at sea,
one’s real cares and worries seem to drop out of sight as the land slips
behind the horizon. Once we were at sea there was no point in worrying,
there was nothing we could do about our problems till we reached the next
port…. Life was, for a while, stripped of its artificialities; [other problems]
seemed quite unimportant compared with the state of the wind and the sea
and the length of the day’s run.”

    Edwin Moses, the great hurdler, has this to say in describing the
concentration necessary for a race: “Your mind has to be absolutely clear.
The fact that you have to cope with your opponent, jet lag, different foods,
sleeping in hotels, and personal problems has to be erased from
consciousness—as if they didn’t exist.”

   Although Moses was talking about what it takes to win world-class
sports events, he could have been describing the kind of concentration we
achieve when we enjoy any activity. The concentration of the flow
experience—together with clear goals and immediate feedback—provides
order to consciousness, inducing the enjoyable condition of psychic
negentropy.
    The Paradox of Control

    Enjoyment often occurs in games, sports, and other leisure activities
that are distinct from ordinary life, where any number of bad things can
happen. If a person loses a chess game or botches his hobby he need not
worry; in “real” life, however, a person who mishandles a business deal
may get fired, lose the mortgage on the house, and end up on public
assistance. Thus the flow experience is typically described as involving a
sense of control—or, more precisely, as lacking the sense of worry about
losing control that is typical in many situations of normal life.

    Here is how a dancer expresses this dimension of the flow experience:
“A strong relaxation and calmness comes over me. I have no worries of
failure. What a powerful and warm feeling it is! I want to expand, to hug
the world. I feel enormous power to effect something of grace and beauty.”
And a chess player: “…I have a general feeling of well-being, and that I am
in complete control of my world.”

    What these respondents are actually describing is the possibility, rather
than the actuality, of control. The ballet dancer may fall, break her leg, and
never make the perfect turn, and the chess player may be defeated and
never become a champion. But at least in principle, in the world of flow
perfection is attainable.

    This sense of control is also reported in enjoyable activities that involve
serious risks, activities that to an outsider would seem to be much more
potentially dangerous than the affairs of normal life. People who practice
hang gliding, spelunking, rock climbing, race-car driving, deep-sea diving,
and many similar sports for fun are purposefully placing themselves in
situations that lack the safety nets of civilized life. Yet all these individuals
report flow experiences in which a heightened sense of control plays an
important part.

    It is usual to explain the motivation of those who enjoy dangerous
activities as some sort of pathological need: they are trying to exorcise a
deep-seated fear, they are compensating, they are compulsively reenacting
an Oedipal fixation, they are “sensation seekers.” While such motives may
be occasionally involved, what is most striking, when one actually speaks to
specialists in risk, is how their enjoyment derives not from the danger itself,
but from their ability to minimize it. So rather than a pathological thrill that
comes from courting disaster, the positive emotion they enjoy is the
perfectly healthy feeling of being able to control potentially dangerous
forces.

    The important thing to realize here is that activities that produce flow
experiences, even the seemingly most risky ones, are so constructed as to
allow the practitioner to develop sufficient skills to reduce the margin of
error to as close to zero as possible. Rock climbers, for instance, recognize
two sets of dangers: “objective” and “subjective” ones. The first kind are
the unpredictable physical events that might confront a person on the
mountain: a sudden storm, an avalanche, a falling rock, a drastic drop in
temperature. One can prepare oneself against these threats, but they can
never be completely foreseen. Subjective dangers are those that arise from
the climber’s lack of skill—including the inability to estimate correctly the
difficulty of a climb in relation to one’s ability.

     The whole point of climbing is to avoid objective dangers as much as
possible, and to eliminate subjective dangers entirely by rigorous discipline
and sound preparation. As a result, climbers genuinely believe that climbing
the Matterhorn is safer than crossing a street in Manhattan, where the
objective dangers—taxi drivers, bicycle messengers, buses, muggers—are
far less predictable than those on the mountain, and where personal skills
have less chance to ensure the pedestrian’s safety.

    As this example illustrates, what people enjoy is not the sense of being
in control, but the sense of exercising control in difficult situations. It is not
possible to experience a feeling of control unless one is willing to give up
the safety of protective routines. Only when a doubtful outcome is at stake,
and one is able to influence that outcome, can a person really know whether
she is in control.

    One type of activity seems to constitute an exception. Games of chance
are enjoyable, yet by definition they are based on random outcomes
presumably not affected by personal skills. The spin of a roulette wheel or
the turn of a card in blackjack cannot be controlled by the player. In this
case, at least, the sense of control must be irrelevant to the experience of
enjoyment.

     The “objective” conditions, however, happen to be deceptive, for it is
actually the case that gamblers who enjoy games of hazard are subjectively
convinced that their skills do play a major role in the outcome. In fact, they
tend to stress the issue of control even more than practitioners of activities
where skills obviously allow greater control. Poker players are convinced it
is their ability, and not chance, that makes them win; if they lose they are
much more inclined to credit bad luck, but even in defeat they are willing to
look for a personal lapse to explain the outcome. Roulette players develop
elaborate systems to predict the turn of the wheel. In general, players of
games of chance often believe that they have the gift of seeing into the
future, at least within the restricted set of goals and rules that defines their
game. And this most ancient feeling of control—whose precursors include
the rituals of divination so prevalent in every culture—is one of the greatest
attractions the experience of gambling offers.

    This sense of being in a world where entropy is suspended explains in
part why flow-producing activities can become so addictive. Novelists have
often written on the theme of chess as a metaphor for escape from reality.
Vladimir Nabokov’s short story “The Luchin Defense” describes a young
chess genius so involved in the game that the rest of his life—his marriage,
his friendships, his livelihood—is going by the boards. Luchin tries to cope
with these problems, but he is unable to see them except in terms of chess
situations. His wife is the White Queen, standing on the fifth square of the
third file, threatened by the Black Bishop, who is Luchin’s agent—and so
forth. In trying to solve his personal conflicts Luchin turns to chess strategy,
and endeavors to invent the “Luchin defense,” a set of moves that will make
him invulnerable to outside attacks. As his relationships in real life
disintegrate, Luchin has a series of hallucinations in which the important
people around him become pieces on a huge chessboard, trying to
immobilize him. Finally he has a vision of the perfect defense against his
problems—and jumps out of the hotel window. Such stories about chess are
not so farfetched; many champions, including the first and the last great
American chess masters, Paul Morphy and Bobby Fischer, became so
comfortable with the beautifully clear-cut and logically ordered world of
chess that they turned their backs on the messy confusion of the “real”
world.

    The exhilaration gamblers feel in “figuring out” random chance is even
more notorious. Early ethnographers have described North American Plains
Indians so hypnotically involved in gambling with buffalo rib bones that
losers would often leave the tepee without clothes in the dead of winter,
having wagered away their weapons, horses, and wives as well. Almost any
enjoyable activity can become addictive, in the sense that instead of being a
conscious choice, it becomes a necessity that interferes with other activities.
Surgeons, for instance, describe operations as being addictive, “like taking
heroin.”

    When a person becomes so dependent on the ability to control an
enjoyable activity that he cannot pay attention to anything else, then he
loses the ultimate control: the freedom to determine the content of
consciousness. Thus enjoyable activities that produce flow have a
potentially negative aspect: while they are capable of improving the quality
of existence by creating order in the mind, they can become addictive, at
which point the self becomes captive of a certain kind of order, and is then
unwilling to cope with the ambiguities of life.

   The Loss of Self-Consciousness

    We have seen earlier that when an activity is thoroughly engrossing,
there is not enough attention left over to allow a person to consider either
the past or the future, or any other temporarily irrelevant stimuli. One item
that disappears from awareness deserves special mention, because in
normal life we spend so much time thinking about it: our own self. Here is a
climber describing this aspect of the experience: “It’s a Zen feeling, like
meditation or concentration. One thing you’re after is the one-pointedness
of mind. You can get your ego mixed up with climbing in all sorts of ways
and it isn’t necessarily enlightening. But when things become automatic, it’s
like an egoless thing, in a way. Somehow the right thing is done without
you ever thinking about it or doing anything at all…. It just happens. And
yet you’re more concentrated.” Or, in the words of a famous long-distance
ocean cruiser: “So one forgets oneself, one forgets everything, seeing only
the play of the boat with the sea, the play of the sea around the boat, leaving
aside everything not essential to that game….”

    The loss of the sense of a self separate from the world around it is
sometimes accompanied by a feeling of union with the environment,
whether it is the mountain, a team, or, in the case of this member of a
Japanese motorcycle gang, the “run” of hundreds of cycles roaring down
the streets of Kyoto: “I understand something, when all of our feelings get
tuned up. When running, we are not in complete harmony at the start. But if
the Run begins to go well, all of us, all of us feel for the others. How can I
say this?…When our minds become one. At such a time, it’s a real
pleasure…. When all of us become one, I understand something…. All of a
sudden I realize, ‘Oh, we’re one’ and think, ‘If we speed as fast as we can,
it will become a real Run.’…When we realize that we become one flesh, it’s
supreme. When we get high on speed. At such a moment, it’s really super.”

     This “becoming one flesh” so vividly described by the Japanese
teenager is a very real feature of the flow experience. Persons report feeling
it as concretely as they feel relief from hunger or from pain. It is a greatly
rewarding experience, but as we shall see later on, one that presents its own
dangers.

    Preoccupation with the self consumes psychic energy because in
everyday life we often feel threatened. Whenever we are threatened we
need to bring the image we have of ourselves back into awareness, so we
can find out whether or not the threat is serious, and how we should meet it.
For instance, if walking down the street I notice some people turning back
and looking at me with grins on their faces, the normal thing to do is
immediately to start worrying: “Is there something wrong? Do I look
funny? Is it the way I walk, or is my face smudged?” Hundreds of times
every day we are reminded of the vulnerability of our self. And every time
this happens psychic energy is lost trying to restore order to consciousness.

    But in flow there is no room for self-scrutiny. Because enjoyable
activities have clear goals, stable rules, and challenges well matched to
skills, there is little opportunity for the self to be threatened. When a
climber is making a difficult ascent, he is totally taken up in the
mountaineering role. He is 100 percent a climber, or he would not survive.
There is no way for anything or anybody to bring into question any other
aspect of his self. Whether his face is smudged makes absolutely no
difference. The only possible threat is the one that comes from the mountain
—but a good climber is well trained to face that threat, and does not need to
bring the self into play in the process.

     The absence of the self from consciousness does not mean that a person
in flow has given up the control of his psychic energy, or that she is
unaware of what happens in her body or in her mind. In fact the opposite is
usually true. When people first learn about the flow experience they
sometimes assume that lack of self-consciousness has something to do with
a passive obliteration of the self, a “going with the flow” Southern
California-style. But in fact the optimal experience involves a very active
role for the self. A violinist must be extremely aware of every movement of
her fingers, as well as of the sound entering her ears, and of the total form
of the piece she is playing, both analytically, note by note, and holistically,
in terms of its overall design. A good runner is usually aware of every
relevant muscle in his body, of the rhythm of his breathing, as well as of the
performance of his competitors within the overall strategy of the race. A
chess player could not enjoy the game if he were unable to retrieve from his
memory, at will, previous positions, past combinations.

    So loss of self-consciousness does not involve a loss of self, and
certainly not a loss of consciousness, but rather, only a loss of
consciousness of the self. What slips below the threshold of awareness is
the concept of self, the information we use to represent to ourselves who we
are. And being able to forget temporarily who we are seems to be very
enjoyable. When not preoccupied with our selves, we actually have a
chance to expand the concept of who we are. Loss of self-consciousness can
lead to self-transcendence, to a feeling that the boundaries of our being have
been pushed forward.

    This feeling is not just a fancy of the imagination, but is based on a
concrete experience of close interaction with some Other, an interaction that
produces a rare sense of unity with these usually foreign entities. During the
long watches of the night the solitary sailor begins to feel that the boat is an
extension of himself, moving to the same rhythms toward a common goal.
The violinist, wrapped in the stream of sound she helps to create, feels as if
she is part of the “harmony of the spheres.” The climber, focusing all her
attention on the small irregularities of the rock wall that will have to support
her weight safely, speaks of the sense of kinship that develops between
fingers and rock, between the frail body and the context of stone, sky, and
wind. In a chess tournament, players whose attention has been riveted, for
hours, to the logical battle on the board claim that they feel as if they have
been merged into a powerful “field of force” clashing with other forces in
some nonmaterial dimension of existence. Surgeons say that during a
difficult operation they have the sensation that the entire operating team is a
single organism, moved by the same purpose; they describe it as a “ballet”
in which the individual is subordinated to the group performance, and all
involved share in a feeling of harmony and power.

     One could treat these testimonials as poetic metaphors and leave them
at that. But it is important to realize that they refer to experiences that are
just as real as being hungry, or as concrete as bumping into a wall. There is
nothing mysterious or mystical about them. When a person invests all her
psychic energy into an interaction—whether it is with another person, a
boat, a mountain, or a piece of music—she in effect becomes part of a
system of action greater than what the individual self had been before. This
system takes its form from the rules of the activity; its energy comes from
the person’s attention. But it is a real system—subjectively as real as being
part of a family, a corporation, or a team—and the self that is part of it
expands its boundaries and becomes more complex than what it had been.

    This growth of the self occurs only if the interaction is an enjoyable
one, that is, if it offers nontrivial opportunities for action and requires a
constant perfection of skills. It is also possible to lose oneself in systems of
action that demand nothing but faith and allegiance. Fundamentalist
religions, mass movements, and extremist political parties also offer
opportunities for self-transcendence that millions are eager to accept. They
also provide a welcome extension of the boundaries of the self, a feeling
that one is involved in something great and powerful. The true believer also
becomes part of the system in concrete terms, because his psychic energy
will be focused and shaped by the goals and rules of his belief. But the true
believer is not really interacting with the belief system; he usually lets his
psychic energy be absorbed by it. From this submission nothing new can
come; consciousness may attain a welcome order, but it will be an order
imposed rather than achieved. At best the self of the true believer resembles
a crystal: strong and beautifully symmetrical, but very slow to grow.

    There is one very important and at first apparently paradoxical
relationship between losing the sense of self in a flow experience, and
having it emerge stronger afterward. It almost seems that occasionally
giving up self-consciousness is necessary for building a strong self-concept.
Why this should be so is fairly clear. In flow a person is challenged to do
her best, and must constantly improve her skills. At the time, she doesn’t
have the opportunity to reflect on what this means in terms of the self—if
she did allow herself to become self-conscious, the experience could not
have been very deep. But afterward, when the activity is over and self-
consciousness has a chance to resume, the self that the person reflects upon
is not the same self that existed before the flow experience: it is now
enriched by new skills and fresh achievements.

    The Transformation of Time

    One of the most common descriptions of optimal experience is that time
no longer seems to pass the way it ordinarily does. The objective, external
duration we measure with reference to outside events like night and day, or
the orderly progression of clocks, is rendered irrelevant by the rhythms
dictated by the activity. Often hours seem to pass by in minutes; in general,
most people report that time seems to pass much faster. But occasionally the
reverse occurs: Ballet dancers describe how a difficult turn that takes less
than a second in real time stretches out for what seems like minutes: “Two
things happen. One is that it seems to pass really fast in one sense. After it’s
passed, it seems to have passed really fast. I see that it’s 1:00 in the
morning, and I say: ‘Aha, just a few minutes ago it was 8:00.’ But then
while I’m dancing…it seems like it’s been much longer than maybe it really
was.” The safest generalization to make about this phenomenon is to say
that during the flow experience the sense of time bears little relation to the
passage of time as measured by the absolute convention of the clock.
    But here, too, there are exceptions that prove the rule. An outstanding
open-heart surgeon who derives a deep enjoyment from his work is well
known for his ability to tell the exact time during an operation with only
half a minute margin of error, without consulting a watch. But in his case
timing is one of the essential challenges of the job: since he is called only to
do a very small but extremely difficult part of the operation, he is usually
involved in several operations simultaneously, and has to walk from one
case to the next, making sure that he is not holding up his colleagues
responsible for the preliminary phases. A similar skill is often found among
practitioners of other activities where time is of the essence, for instance,
runners and racers. In order to pace themselves precisely in a competition,
they have to be very sensitive to the passage of seconds and minutes. In
such cases the ability to keep track of time becomes one of the skills
necessary to do well in the activity, and thus it contributes to, rather than
detracts from, the enjoyment of the experience.

    But most flow activities do not depend on clock time; like baseball, they
have their own pace, their own sequences of events marking transitions
from one state to another without regard to equal intervals of duration. It is
not clear whether this dimension of flow is just an epiphenomenon—a by-
product of the intense concentration required for the activity at hand—or
whether it is something that contributes in its own right to the positive
quality of the experience. Although it seems likely that losing track of the
clock is not one of the major elements of enjoyment, freedom from the
tyranny of time does add to the exhilaration we feel during a state of
complete involvement.
THE AUTOTELIC EXPERIENCE
The key element of an optimal experience is that it is an end in itself. Even
if initially undertaken for other reasons, the activity that consumes us
becomes intrinsically rewarding. Surgeons speak of their work: “It is so
enjoyable that I would do it even if I didn’t have to.” Sailors say: “I am
spending a lot of money and time on this boat, but it is worth it—nothing
quite compares with the feeling I get when I am out sailing.”

    The term “autotelic” derives from two Greek words, auto meaning self,
and telos meaning goal. It refers to a self-contained activity, one that is done
not with the expectation of some future benefit, but simply because the
doing itself is the reward. Playing the stock market in order to make money
is not an autotelic experience; but playing it in order to prove one’s skill at
foretelling future trends is—even though the outcome in terms of dollars
and cents is exactly the same. Teaching children in order to turn them into
good citizens is not autotelic, whereas teaching them because one enjoys
interacting with children is. What transpires in the two situations is
ostensibly identical; what differs is that when the experience is autotelic, the
person is paying attention to the activity for its own sake; when it is not, the
attention is focused on its consequences.

    Most things we do are neither purely autotelic nor purely exotelic (as
we shall call activities done for external reasons only), but are a
combination of the two. Surgeons usually enter into their long period of
training because of exotelic expectations: to help people, to make money, to
achieve prestige. If they are lucky, after a while they begin to enjoy their
work, and then surgery becomes to a large extent also autotelic.

    Some things we are initially forced to do against our will turn out in the
course of time to be intrinsically rewarding. A friend of mine, with whom I
worked in an office many years ago, had a great gift. Whenever the work
got to be particularly boring, he would look up with a glazed look in his
half-closed eyes, and he would start to hum a piece of music—a Bach
chorale, a Mozart concerto, a Beethoven symphony. But humming is a
pitifully inadequate description of what he did. He reproduced the entire
piece, imitating with his voice the principal instruments involved in the
particular passage: now he wailed like a violin, now he crooned like a
bassoon, now he blared like a baroque trumpet. We in the office listened
entranced, and resumed work refreshed. What is curious is the way my
friend had developed this gift. Since the age of three, he had been taken by
his father to concerts of classical music. He remembers having been
unspeakably bored, and occasionally falling asleep in the seat, to be
awakened by a sharp slap. He grew to hate concerts, classical music, and
presumably his father—but year after year he was forced to repeat this
painful experience. Then one evening, when he was about seven years old,
during the overture to a Mozart opera, he had what he described as an
ecstatic insight: he suddenly discerned the melodic structure of the piece,
and had an overwhelming sense of a new world opening up before him. It
was the three years of painful listening that had prepared him for this
epiphany, years during which his musical skills had developed, however
unconsciously, and made it possible for him to understand the challenge
Mozart had built into the music.

    Of course he was lucky; many children never reach the point of
recognizing the possibilities of the activity into which they are forced, and
end up disliking it forever. How many children have come to hate classical
music because their parents forced them to practice an instrument? Often
children—and adults—need external incentives to take the first steps in an
activity that requires a difficult restructuring of attention. Most enjoyable
activities are not natural; they demand an effort that initially one is reluctant
to make. But once the interaction starts to provide feedback to the person’s
skills, it usually begins to be intrinsically rewarding.

    An autotelic experience is very different from the feelings we typically
have in the course of life. So much of what we ordinarily do has no value in
itself, and we do it only because we have to do it, or because we expect
some future benefit from it. Many people feel that the time they spend at
work is essentially wasted—they are alienated from it, and the psychic
energy invested in the job does nothing to strengthen their self. For quite a
few people free time is also wasted. Leisure provides a relaxing respite
from work, but it generally consists of passively absorbing information,
without using any skills or exploring new opportunities for action. As a
result life passes in a sequence of boring and anxious experiences over
which a person has little control.

    The autotelic experience, or flow, lifts the course of life to a different
level. Alienation gives way to involvement, enjoyment replaces boredom,
helplessness turns into a feeling of control, and psychic energy works to
reinforce the sense of self, instead of being lost in the service of external
goals. When experience is intrinsically rewarding life is justified in the
present, instead of being held hostage to a hypothetical future gain.

    But, as we have already seen in the section dealing with the sense of
control, one must be aware of the potentially addictive power of flow. We
should reconcile ourselves to the fact that nothing in the world is entirely
positive; every power can be misused. Love may lead to cruelty, science can
create destruction, technology unchecked produces pollution. Optimal
experience is a form of energy, and energy can be used either to help or to
destroy. Fire warms or burns; atomic energy can generate electricity or it
can obliterate the world. Energy is power, but power is only a means. The
goals to which it is applied can make life either richer or more painful.

    The Marquis de Sade perfected the infliction of pain into a form of
pleasure, and in fact, cruelty is a universal source of enjoyment for people
who have not developed more sophisticated skills. Even in societies that are
called “civilized” because they try to make life enjoyable without
interfering with anyone’s well-being, people are attracted to violence.
Gladiatorial combat amused the Romans, Victorians paid money to see rats
being torn up by terriers, Spaniards approach the killing of bulls with
reverence, and boxing is a staple of our own culture.

    Veterans from Vietnam or other wars sometimes speak with nostalgia
about front-line action, describing it as a flow experience. When you sit in a
trench next to a rocket launcher, life is focused very clearly: the goal is to
destroy the enemy before he destroys you; good and bad become self-
evident; the means of control are at hand; distractions are eliminated. Even
if one hates war, the experience can be more exhilarating than anything
encountered in civilian life.
    Criminals often say things such as, “If you showed me something I can
do that’s as much fun as breaking into a house at night, and lifting the
jewelry without waking anyone up, I would do it.” Much of what we label
juvenile delinquency—car theft, vandalism, rowdy behavior in general—is
motivated by the same need to have flow experiences not available in
ordinary life. As long as a significant segment of society has few
opportunities to encounter meaningful challenges, and few chances to
develop the skills necessary to benefit from them, we must expect that
violence and crime will attract those who cannot find their way to more
complex autotelic experiences.

    This issue becomes even more complicated when we reflect that
respected scientific and technological activities, which later assume a
highly ambiguous and perhaps even horrifying aspect, are originally very
enjoyable. Robert Oppenheimer called his work on the atomic bomb a
“sweet problem,” and there is no question that the manufacture of nerve gas
or the planning of Star Wars can be deeply engrossing to those involved in
them.

    The flow experience, like everything else, is not “good” in an absolute
sense. It is good only in that it has the potential to make life more rich,
intense, and meaningful; it is good because it increases the strength and
complexity of the self. But whether the consequence of any particular
instance of flow is good in a larger sense needs to be discussed and
evaluated in terms of more inclusive social criteria. The same is true,
however, of all human activities, whether science, religion, or politics. A
particular religious belief may benefit a person or a group, but repress many
others. Christianity helped to integrate the decaying ethnic communities of
the Roman Empire, but it was instrumental in dissolving many cultures with
which it later came into contact. A given scientific advance may be good
for science and a few scientists, but bad for humanity as a whole. It is an
illusion to believe that any solution is beneficial for all people and all times;
no human achievement can be taken as the final word. Jefferson’s
uncomfortable dictum “Eternal vigilance is the price of liberty” applies
outside the fields of politics as well; it means that we must constantly
reevaluate what we do, lest habits and past wisdom blind us to new
possibilities.
    It would be senseless, however, to ignore a source of energy because it
can be misused. If mankind had tried to ban fire because it could be used to
burn things down, we would not have grown to be very different from the
great apes. As Democritus said so simply many centuries ago: “Water can
be both good and bad, useful and dangerous. To the danger, however, a
remedy has been found: learning to swim.” To swim in this case involves
learning to distinguish the useful and the harmful forms of flow, and then
making the most of the former while placing limits on the latter. The task is
to learn how to enjoy everyday life without diminishing other people’s
chances to enjoy theirs.
