ARRIAN’S ENCHIRIDION AND THE
DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS

Lecture given to Stanford freshmen as a part

of their Cultures, Ideas, and Values Program,

November 30, 1994.
PROFESSOR IVANHOE HAS INVITED ME to introduce you to this little book The
Enchiridion. It is a compendium, a brief summary of a larger work of a philosopher
I’m going to talk about this morning. If you read the handout, you'll know I first saw
it when I was given a copy by a philosophy professor here at Stanford years ago.
You'll also know that I was no kid when I got it. The navy had sent me to graduate
school when I was thirty-seven years old, after I had spent fifteen years as a fighter
pilot, experimental test pilot, and made dozens of cruises flying off aircraft carriers.
The idea was to get some nontechnical education into my head to broaden me for
what was looking like a successful career up the road.

I had spent a year and a half studying international relations here and had all the
course work and most of my master’s thesis done when I realized I was about to
leave Stanford without taking on anything I would call wisdom. By that I mean,
inspiration, a polestar to guide me. I had simply been processing tedious material
about how nations organized and governed themselves. I was too old for that. I
knew how political systems operated; I had been beating political systems for
years.

The navy had given me a blank check for two full years on campus, and in the
coming final six months, I was determined to find something that would sustain me
in times of peril, which I felt in my bones were coming. It was 1962, and Vietnam
was creeping into the back pages of the newspapers. I knew that part of the world
and all of its enigmas well, and I sensed the stage being set for war.

It was my lucky day when I met Phil Rhinelander. He was Stanford’s dean of
humanities and sciences and had been in the navy in World War II. I told him of
my feelings, that I had six more months of navy sponsorship at Stanford, and he in-
vited me to take the course he was giving down there in the Philosophy Depart-
ment: The Problems of Good and Evil. “What’s the idea of it?” I asked. I'll never for-
get his reply: “The course is a meld of philosophy and literature. It addresses the
problem of man seemingly having an underlying need to believe that virtue is re-
warded and evil punished on this earth, when the evidence is overwhelming that

there is no moral economy in the universe!”

“The statistics are out there,” he said, “people good and evil routinely coming to
random ends—riches or poverty, health or illness, plush living or concentration
camps. But that does not seem to relieve man’s subconscious feeling that the world
works the other way. And when an unwary person is suddenly smitten by what he
considers an unjustified evil, he frequently comes unhinged. We read about cases
like that. For instance, what was King Lear’s solution for his problem of filial ingrat-
itude? [He was a good father and good king whose children betrayed him.] He went
insane! And so on to other cases. It is my belief that an educated person should not
be caught short when he first comes upon the hard evidence that there is no moral
economy in the universe, and that is why I originated the course.”

Well, you might imagine what was going through my head. This was the kind of
information I needed! Then Rhinelander made me a surprising and wonderful
offer: “Without any background in philosophy, you deserve to have special help to
bring you up to speed. I would meet with you in my study at my campus home on
Gerona Road weekly, for a one-hour, one-on-one tutorial.”

Believe me, those hours we spent together in his study were golden, and I could
tell you of many things that I finally got straight in my head there, but I’ll jump right
to our last tutorial. As I was about to leave, he reached up to his top shelf and pulled
down a very worn little brown booklet and handed it to me. It was The Enchiridion.

Phil said, “Here is a little book to remember me by. This copy is the one I always
used at Harvard when I taught Humanities 4. This is kind of an executive sum-
mary— handbook for the busy man. In the Greek language, Enchiridion means
something like ‘ready at hand’ some of the main content of the teachings and con-
versations of a unique person. He is called Epictetus, born a slave to a Greek
woman in a town in Asia Minor in the year A.D. 50. He became a Stoic. The religion
of the Stoics was a natural one, and I remember your great interest as we discussed
David Hume’s Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion. Also, you’re a military man,
and you'll see in the preface that Frederick the Great never failed to take the The
Enchiridion with him on his campaigns.”

Professor Rhinelander gave me more background on Epictetus and Stoicism, and
then we said goodbye. I was not to see him for another twelve years. Three years
after that, I was shot down and was in a communist political prison, to stay there
eight years, to live four years in solitary confinement, to be in leg irons for two of



them, to have bones broken, and so on. Who would have ever predicted that?

But now, I want to tell you more about the life of Epictetus and how he got into
print. As a young slave he had many masters, some cruel; he was permanently crip-
pled by one early in his life. He was eventually taken to Rome in a slave caravan
and bought at auction by a freed slave named Epaphroditus, a secretary to Em-
peror Nero. Epaphroditus was at Nero’s side as the army was breaking down the
door to arrest the emperor as a public enemy when the latter tried to cut his own
throat, muffed it, and Epaphroditus finished the job.

Through this fluke, Epaphroditus forever thereafter living under a cloud, Epicte-
tus just took to the streets of the city of Rome. A high-minded, intelligent young man,
who learned Greek at his mother’s knee, he started attending the philosophy lec-
tures given in the public parks. And in those days in Rome, “philosophy” was syn-
onymous with “Stoicism.” The turning point in his life was to be adopted by Muso-
nius Rufus, the best teacher of philosophy in first-century Rome. Although Epictetus
was still technically a slave, Rufus, an Etruscan knight, took him as a student. His
tutelage ran on for ten years, and then Rufus launched him on his career as a bona
fide philosopher of Rome.

Epictetus, like all philosophers in Rome, was exiled by Emperor Domitian in the
year A.D. 89, and he picked out the little town of Nicopolis, on the Adriatic coast of
Greece, as a place to found a school. My favorite authorities set the date of his death
at A.D. 138 at age eighty-eight. I’ve come across nothing about his “retirement,” so I
think of him starting his school in about A.D. 90 at the age of forty and teaching
there for another forty or forty-five years. This little book is only selected excerpts
from eight volumes of Epictetus’s lectures and conversations, all given—we
think—in the year 108. He was talking to basically rich young men from formidable
families, mostly from Athens and Rome. It was the Socrates scene all over again,
five hundred years later—the same students, same age (mid-twenties), the same
type of dialogue.

Epictetus, a bachelor until his very late years, when he took a wife his age to help
him care for an infant he rescued from death by exposure, was a natural, extraor-
dinarily gifted teacher. He was gregarious, loved the Olympic games, which were
conducted only about fifty miles from his school. He and his friends would go there
together and harangue the crowds. His manner of speaking was not that of your
typical prissy moralist, though he focused explicitly and almost entirely on conduct.

He and his philosophic protege, the seventy-one years younger Emperor Marcus
Aurelius, went down in history as practicing Stoics, not boring theoreticians. Both
were disinterested in the “intellectual paraphernalia” of most “philosophies:” in-
cluding their own—Stoic physics, Stoic logic, and so on. “What do I care?” asked
Epictetus, “whether all existing things are composed of atoms, or of indivisibles, or
of fire or earth? Is it not enough to learn the true nature of the good and the evil?”

The religious possibilities of Stoicism were developed further by Epictetus than
by any of his Stoic predecessors over the previous four hundred years. He often
phrased his pithy remarks in athletic or military metaphors: “Difficulties are what
show men’s character. Therefore when a difficult crisis meets you, remember that
you are as the raw youth, with whom God—the trainer is wrestling.... If Thou send-
est me to a place where men have no means of living in accordance with nature, I
shall depart this life, not in disobedience to Thee, but as though Thou were sound-
ing for me the recall.”

And he was funny.

He asks and answers the question: What do you do for friends, as you ascend the
ladder of intellectual sophistication? Do you hang in with your old pals or concen-
trate on intellectual peers? “If you do not drink with old friends as you used to drink
with them, you cannot be loved by them as much. So choose whether you want to
be a boozer and likeable to them, or sober and not likeable.” (Then he makes it
clear that in his mind, satisfaction and self-respect are best served by escalating
friendships apace with your education.) “But if that does not please you, turn about
the whole of you, to the opposite; become one of the addicts to unnatural vice, one
of the adulterers, and act in corresponding fashion. Yes, and jump up and shout
your applause to the dancer!”

To the painfully shy and reticent students: “As the good chorus-singers do not ren-
der solos, but sing perfectly well with a number of other voices, so some men can-
not walk around by themselves. Man, if you are anybody, both walk around by
yourself, and talk to yourself, and don’t hide yourself in the chorus. Let yourself be
laughed at sometimes, look about you, shake yourself up, so as to at least find out
who you actually are!”

Now neither these eight volumes of Epictetus’s lectures, hallway talk, and private
conversations nor their “executive summary” were compiled by Epictetus. He
couldn’t have cared less about being in print. They were taken down in some kind



of frantic shorthand by a twenty-three-year-old student, a remarkable man, Flavius
Arrianus, usually known as Arrian. He was an aristocratic Greek born in a Black
Sea province of Asia Minor. You can’t help but imagine what it took for him to
improvise this shorthand and follow the old man around and take down all that
material. After getting a load of Epictetus and his “living” speech, he must have said
something like, “Wow, we’ve got to get this guy down on papyrus!” In his dedi-
cation of his final manuscript to a friend, he writes: “Whatever I heard him say, I
used to write down, word for word, as best I could, endeavouring to preserve it as a
memorial, for my own future use, of his way of thinking and the frankness of his
speech.”

History gives us snapshots of Arrian’s illustrious career. After leaving Epictetus’s
school and a term as a successful Roman army officer, we find him in Athens lec-
turing in about A.D. 120 and there meeting the Roman emperor Hadrian, who was
on a five-year tour of the empire following his investiture in 117. Epictetus figured
into two fallouts of Arrian’s presence in Athens at that time. First, in A.D. 130, Hadri-
an appointed Arrian consul for a year, followed by six years as governor of the
large province of Cappadocia in Asia Minor. Arrian introduced Epictetus to Hadri-
an, and they became lifetime friends. Second, when Arrian vacated his lectureship
in Athens for politics, he was relieved by Q. Janius Rusticus, who later became the
tutor of the young Marcus Aurelius. Emperor Aurelius acknowledges in his later
book Meditations his admiration for Epictetus, having been assigned his eight vol-
umes by Rusticus. Arrian lived in Athens after his political career and there wrote
several books, including his definitive text on Alexander the Great’s expedition to
the east: The Anabasis of Alexander.

Sometime after Arrian’s death, four of his eight volumes of Epictetus disap-
peared. The four that remained were put together during the Middle Ages and
bound as The Discourses. So you'll find things from the four lost books in Enchirid-
ion that are not in Discourses. But The Discourses give us lots of background mate-
rial that helps us better understand Enchiridion.

The time between Stanford and prison was a very eventful period in my life. I
started a war (dropped the first-ever American bombs on North Vietnam) and led
good men in more than 130 aerial combat missions in flak; throughout three seven-
month cruises to Vietnam I had not only Enchiridion but The Discourses on my

bedside table on each of the three aircraft carriers I flew from. And I read them.

On the 9th of September 1965, I flew right into a flak trap, at treetop level, 500
knots, in a little A-4 airplane—cockpit walls not even three feet apart—which I
couldn’t steer after it was on fire, control system shot out. After ejection I had about
30 seconds to make my last statement in freedom before I landed on the main street
of that little village right ahead. And so help me, I whispered to myself: “Five years
down there, at least. I’m leaving the world of technology and entering the world of
Epictetus.”

I want to step off the chronology escalator for just a minute and explain what
memories of The Enchiridion I did have “ready at hand” when I ejected from that
airplane. What I had in hand was the understanding that a Stoic always keeps sepa-
rate files in his mind for (A) those things that are up to him and (B) those things that
are not up to him or, another way of saying it, (A) those things that are within his
power and (B) those things that are beyond his power or, still another way of saying
it, (A) those things that are within the grasp of his will, his free will, and (B) those
things that are beyond it. Among the relatively few things that are up to me, within
my power, within my will, are my opinions, my aims, my aversions, my own grief,
my own joy, my attitude toward what is going on, my own good, and my own evil.

Now I’m talking like a preacher here for a bit. Please understand that I’m not try-
ing to sell anything; it’s just the most efficient way to explain it. Stoicism is one of
those things that, when described analytically, sounds horrible to some modern
people. Stoic scholars agree that, to describe it effectively, the teacher must become,
for the time being at least, a Stoic.

For instance, to give you a better feel for why your own good and your own evil
are on that list, I want to quote Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn from his book Gulag
Archipelago, when he talks about that point in prison when he gets his act together,
realizes his residual powers, and starts what I know as “ascending,” riding the up-
drafts of occasional euphoria as you realize you are getting to know yourself and
the world for the first time.

It was only when I lay there on the rotting prison straw that I sensed within
myself the first stirrings of good. Gradually it was disclosed to me that the line
separating good and evil passes not between states nor between social classes
nor between political parties, but right through every human heart, through



all human hearts. And that is why I turn back to the years of my imprisonment
and say, sometimes to the astonishment of those about me, “Bless you, prison,
for having been a part of my life.”

I understand that.

He learned, as I and many others have learned, that good and evil are not just ab-
stractions that you kick around and give lectures about and attribute to this person
and that. The only good and evil that means anything is right in your own heart—
within your will, within your power, where it’s up to you. What the Stoics say is,
“You take care of that, and you’ll have your hands full.”

What is not up to you? beyond your power? not subject to your will in the last in-
stance? For starters, let’s take your station in life. As I glide down toward that little
town on my short parachute ride, I’m just about to learn how negligible is my con-
trol over my station in life. It’s not at all up to me. Of course, I’m going right now
from being the wing commander of a thousand pilots, crewmen, maintenance men,
a hundred airplanes, and all sorts of symbolic status and goodwill to being an ob-
ject of contempt. “Criminal,” P’ll be known as. But that’s not half the revelation that
is the realization of your own fragility—that you can be reduced by the natural ele-
ments or men to a helpless, sobbing wreck, unable to control even your own bowels,
in a matter of minutes. And more than even that, you’re going to face fragilities you
never before let yourself believe could be true. Like after mere minutes, in a flurry
of action while being knocked down and then sat up to be bound with tourniquet-
tight ropes, with care, by a professional, hands cuffed behind, jackknifed forward,
head pushed down between your ankles held secure in lugs attached to a heavy
iron bar, that with the onrush of anxiety, knowing your upper-body blood circu-
lation has been stopped and feeling the ever-growing pain and the ever-closing in of
claustrophobia as the man standing on your back gives your head one last shove
down with his heel and you start to gasp and vomit, that you can be made to blurt
out answers, probably correct answers, to questions about anything they know you
know. (I’m not going to pull you through that explanation again; I’ll just call it “tak-
ing the ropes.”)

No, station in life can be changed from that of a dignified and competent gen-
tleman of culture to that of a panic-stricken, sobbing, self-loathing wreck, maybe a
permanent wreck if you have no will, in less than an hour. So what? So after you

work a lifetime to get yourself all set up and then delude yourself into thinking that
you have some kind of ownership claim on your station in life, you’re riding for a
fall. You’re asking for disappointment. To avoid that, stop kidding yourself, just do
the best you can on a commonsense basis to make your station in life what you
want it to be, but never get hooked on it. Make sure in your heart of hearts, in your
inner self, that you treat your station in life with indifference. Not with contempt,
only with indifference.

And so on to a long list of things that some unreflective people assume they’re as-
sured of controlling to the last instance: your reputation, for example. Do what you
will, it’s at least as fickle as your station in life. Others decide what your reputation
is. Try to make it as good as possible, but again, don’t get hooked on it. In your
heart, when you get out the key and open up that old rolltop desk where you really
keep your stuff, don’t let “reputation” get mixed up with what’s within your moral
purpose, what’s within the power of your will, in other words, what’s up to you.
Make sure it’s in the bottom drawer, filed under “matters of indifference.” And so
too with your health, your wealth, your pleasure, your pain, your fame, your
disrepute, your life, your death. They are all externals, all outside your control in the
last instance, all outside the power of where you really live. And where you really
live is confined to the regime of your moral purpose, confined to matters that can
be projected by your acts of will: like desires, aims, aversions, judgments, attitudes,
and, of course, your good and your evil. For a human, the moral purpose, the will, is
the only repository of things of absolute value. Whether they are projected wisely
or foolishly, for good or for evil, is up to you. When his will is set on the right
course, a man becomes good; when it’s on a foul course, he becomes evil. With the
right course comes good luck and happiness, and with the foul course, bad luck and
misery. To a Stoic, bad luck is your fault; you’ve become addicted to externals.
Epictetus: “What are tragedies, but the portrayal in tragic verse of the sufferings of
men who have admired things external?” Not even God will intercede in your deci-
sions. Epictetus: “God gives you attributes, like magnanimity, courage, and en-
durance, to enable you to bear whatever happens. These are given free of all re-
straint, compulsion, or hindrance; He has put the whole matter under your control
without reserving even for Himself any power to prevent or hinder.” Your deliv-
erance and your destruction are 100 percent up to you.

I know the difficulties of gulping all this down right away. You keep thinking of



practical problems. Everybody has to play the game of life. You can’t just walk
around saying, “I don’t care about my health or wealth or my reputation or
whether I’m sent to prison or not.” Epictetus was a great teacher because he could
draw a word picture that cleared the way to look at what he was talking about.

In this case, Epictetus said everybody should play the game of life—that the best
play it with “skill, form, speed and grace.” But like most games, you play it with a
ball. Your team devotes all its energies to getting the ball across the line. But after
the game, what do you do with the ball? Nobody much cares. It’s not worth any-
thing. The competition, the game, was the thing. The ball was just used to make the
game possible, so just roll it under the porch and forget it—let it wait for the next
game. Most important of all, don’t covet it, don’t seek it, don’t set your heart on it.
Doing so makes externals dangerous, makes them the route to slavery. First you
covet or abhor things and then along comes he who can confer or remove them. I
quote Enchiridion 14: “A man’s master is he who is able to confer or remove what-
ever that man seeks or shuns. Whoever then would be free, let him wish nothing, let
him decline nothing, which depends on others; else he must necessarily become a
slave.”

So I took those core thoughts into prison; I also remembered a lot of attitude-
shaping remarks from the Enchiridion on how not to kid yourself into thinking that
you can somehow stand aloof, be an “observer of the passing scene,” aloof from the
prisoner underground organization: Enchiridion 17: “Remember that you are an
actor in a drama of such sort as the Author chooses—if short, then in a short one; if
long, then in a long one. If it be his pleasure that you should enact a poor man, or a
cripple, or a ruler, or a private citizen, see that you act it well. For this is your busi-
ness—to act well the given part. But to choose it belongs to Another.” (The capital As
on Author and Another are Stoic code markings for another name for God.)

Another attitude-shaping remark on when in tight straits, how you should stifle
what’s in you of that student body president personality, of give and take, openness,
being responsive, offering counteroptions rather than outright refusal to go along.
We called people like that “players” in prison and tried to prevent them from dig-
ging their own graves. Enchiridion 28: “If a person had delivered up your body to
some passer-by, you would certainly be angry. And do you feel no shame in deliv-
ering up your own mind to any reviler?”

All that, over the previous three years, I had put away for the future.

Right now (and I’m back on chronology), it’s very quiet in the parachute, and I can
hear the rifle shots down below and match them up with rips occurring in the para-
chute canopy above me. Then I can hear the noontime shouting and see the fists
waving in the town as my chute hooks a tree but deposits me on the main street in
good shape. With two quick-release fastener flips, I’m free of the chute and immedi-
ately gang tackled by the ten or fifteen town roughnecks I had seen in my periph-
eral vision, pounding up the street from my right. It felt to me like the quarterback
sack of the century; I don’t want to make a big thing of this or indicate that I was
surprised at my reception, but by the time the tackling and pummeling and twisting
and wrenching were over, and it lasted for three or more minutes before the guy in
the pith helmet got there to blow his whistle, I had a badly broken leg that I felt sure
would be with me for life. And that hunch turned out to be right. And I’ll have to say
that I felt only minor relief when I hazily recalled Epictetus’s admonition in
Enchiridion 9: “Lameness is an impediment of the leg, but not to the will; and say
this to yourself with regard to everything that happens. For you will find it to be an
impediment to something else, but not truly to yourself.”

As an insider, I knew the whole setup on prisoners of war—that the North Viet-
namese already held about thirty prisoners in that early September 1965, probably
up in Hanoi, that I was the only wing commander to survive an ejection, and that I
would be their senior, their commanding officer, and would remain so, very likely,
throughout this war that I felt sure would last at least five years. And here I was
starting off crippled and flat on my back.

Well, Epictetus turned out to be right. After a very crude operation just to get my
lock-kneed and splayed leg under me, I was on crutches within a couple of months,
and the crooked leg, healing itself, was strong enough to hold me up without crutch-
es in a few more. I took command (clandestinely, of course) of the by-then seventy-
five pilots—due to grow to nearly five hundred over the eight years—determined
“to play well the given part.”

I'll drop the prison chronology right there and concentrate on bringing to light as
many more interesting wrinkles of Epictetus and his Stoicism as time will allow.

I would like to say straight off that I have read through and studied The Dis-
courses at least ten times, to say nothing of my many excursions into Enchiridion,
and I have never found a single inconsistency in Epictetus’s code of tenets. It is a
put-together package, free of contradictions. The old boy may or may not appeal to



you, but if he turns you off, don’t blame it on incoherence; Epictetus has no problem
with logic.

I think more needs to be said about good and evil. After all, the Stoic is indifferent
to everything but good and evil. In Stoic thought, our good and our evil come from
the same locus. “Vice and virtue reside in the will alone.” “The essence of good and
evil lies in an attitude of the will.” Solzhenitsyn locates it in the heart, and Epictetus
would buy that—or will or moral purpose or character or soul—he’s not a nitpicker
about things like that. What he bears down on is that your good and your evil are
the essence of you. He says you are moral purpose, you are rational will. You are
not hair, you are not skin, you are moral purpose—get that beautiful, and you will
be beautiful.

That was revealed to Solzhenitsyn when he felt within himself the first stirrings
of good. And in that chapter the old Russian elaborated other truths about good and
evil; the line separating them does not pass between political or cultural or ethnic
groupings, but it does pass right through every human heart, through all human
hearts. He adds that for any individual over the years, this separation line within
the heart shifts, oscillates somewhat, that even in hearts overwhelmed by evil, one
small bridgehead to good is retained. And even in the best of all hearts, there re-
main an un-uprooted small corner of evil. There is some good and some evil in all of
us. In that same chapter, Solzhenitsyn comments: “If only there were evil people
somewhere insidiously committing evil deeds, and it were necessary only to sepa-
rate them from the rest of us and destroy them. But the line dividing good and evil
cuts through the heart of every human being, and who is willing to destroy a piece
of his own heart?”

I just want you to know I connect with that. In a crucible like a torture prison, you
reflect, you silently study what makes those about you tick. Once I had taken the
measure of my torture guard, watched his eyes as he worked, watched him move,
felt him move as he stood on my slumped-over back and cinched up the ropes
pulling my shoulders together, I came to know that there was good in him. (That
was ironic because when he first came in with the new commissar, when torture
was instigated after I got there, I had nicknamed him “Pigeye” because of the total
vacancy of the stare of the one eye he presented as he peeked through cell door
peepholes.) He was my age, balding and wiry, quick, lithe, and strong, like an ath-
letic trainer. He was totally emotionless—thus his emotionless eyes. Under orders,

he put me through the ropes fifteen times over the years and rebroke my bad leg
once, I feel sure inadvertently. It was a court-martial scene, and he was having to
give me the ropes before a board of North Vietnamese officers; I could tell he was
nervous, and he pressed me flat over my bad leg instead of the good one he had al-
ways put the tension on before. The healing knee cartilage gave way with a loud
pop, and everybody but the two of us got up and left the room.

In all those years, we probably had no more than twenty hours, one on one, to-
gether. But neither of us ever broke the code of an unvaryingly strict line of duty
relationship. He never tricked me, always played it straight, and I begged no mercy.
I admired that in him, and I could tell he did in me. And when people say, “He was
a torturer, didn’t you hate him?” I say, like Solzhenitsyn, “to the astonishment of
those about me,” “No, he was a good soldier, never overstepped his line of duty.”

By that time, I had learned that fear and guilt are the real pincers that break
men’s wills. I would chant under my breath as I was marched to interrogation,
knowing that I must refuse to comply and take the ropes, “Your eyes must show no
fear; they must show no guilt.” The North Vietnamese had learned never to take a
prisoner “downtown”—to the payoff for what our whole treatment regime was
about, public propaganda exploitation—unless he was truly intimidated, unless
they were sure he felt fear. They had suffered the political damage of several, in-
cluding myself, who had acted up, spoken up, and blurted out the truth to the hand-
picked audience of foreigners at the press conference. Book 4 of The Discourses:
“When a man who has set his will neither on dying nor upon living at any cost,
comes into the presence of the tyrant, what is there to prevent him from being with-
out fear?—Nothing.” Fear is an emotion, and to Stoics, all emotions are acts of will!
You fear because you want to fear. Refuse to want to fear, and you start acquiring a
constancy of character that makes it impossible for another to do you wrong.
Threats have no effect unless you fear. Learning to take charge of your emotions is
empowering. When you get there, Enchiridion 30 applies: “No one can harm you
without your permission.”

What are some of the guidelines to identifying the good and the evil in Stoic
thought? Well, first, Stoicism goes back to the idea that nature is God’s body and
that it doesn’t do to try to improve on it. In fact God and nature are two aspects of
the same thing. God’s soul is the mind of the universe, and nature is his body. All
humans are not only a part of nature but a part of the mind. (The mind is like a



flame, and our individual consciousnesses are sparks in it.) Just as the mind is the
active and nature is the passive, so our minds are active and our bodies passive.
Mind over matter—it all happens in your head, so don’t worry about your body.
The perfect man models himself on this operation of the universe. Nothing is ever
lost. All remains in the care of Providence. Just as the universe, in which the mind
of God is imminent and indwelling and moves in a manner self-sufficient and self-
ruling, so the good man is independent, autonomous, a law unto himself and a fol-
lower of the eternal guidance of duty and conscience.

You probably gasped back there when I said that even God would decline to
intercede as you made self-destructive decisions. That comes from this idea that
each man must remain autonomous, a law unto himself. That’s the way the Stoics
said the system works.

All this got started back in fifth-century B.C. Athens as a backlash against a pre-
occupation with inuring everybody to the perfect society. Diogenes of Sinope, a
friend of both Aristotle and Alexander the Great (they all knew each other, and all
died within a two-year period), struck out on his campaign, not to conquer the east
as did Alexander, not to stamp out ignorance as did Aristotle, but to do something
about man’s condition as a mere cog in a machine, where he had no way to fight
back against his slavery to his fears and his desires. He had to take command of
himself, control himself. The Stoic goal was not the good society but the good man.

But the Stoics were good citizens. In politics the Stoic would love his country and
hold himself ready to die at any time to avert its disgrace or his own. But a man’s
conscience was to be higher than any law. A right of man is to be self-ruling!

So on good and evil, where does that leave us? Nothing that is natural can be evil.
Death cannot be evil. Disease cannot be evil. Natural disasters cannot be evil. Noth-
ing inevitable can be evil. The universe as a whole is perfect, and everything in it
has a place in the overall design. Inevitability is produced by the workings of this
divine mechanism.

Neither good nor evil can be abstractions. Epictetus said, “Where do I look for the
good and for the evil? Within me, in that which is my own. But in that which is
another’s never employ the words ‘good’ or ‘evil’ or anything of the sort. Goods or
evils can never be things others do to you or for you.”

Why not make health or life be good? Because man deserves the good, and it’s
better that he not deserve anything he does not control. Otherwise, he will go after

what is not his, and this is the start of crime, wars, you name it.

Another thing. You do not control God. You must not refer to him as good or evil.
Why not? If you pin these mundane labels on him, reciting “God is good,” people
may become tempted, when things God controls run counter to what they’re trying
to do—weather being unfavorable for farmers or the wind being from the wrong
direction for sailors—to start calling him evil, too. And that’s impious. “Remember,”
says Epictetus, “piety must be preserved. Unless piety and self-interest be con-
joined, piety cannot be maintained in any man.”

Now for some other things that follow from the assumptions of Stoicism that you
might not have thought of:

The Stoics say that the invincible man is he who cannot be dismayed by any hap-
pening outside his span of control, outside his will, his moral purpose. Does this
sound irresponsible to you? Here you have a man who pays no attention as the
world blows up around him, so long as he had no part in causing it.

The answer to that depends on whether or not you believe in collective guilt. The
Stoics do not. Here is what The Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Macmillan) says about
collective guilt: “If guilt, in the proper sense, turns on deliberate wrongdoing, it
seems that no one can be guilty for the act of another person—there can be no
shared or collective or universal guilt. Guilt is incurred by the free choice of the
individual.... But many have questioned this. Among them are some sociologists
who misrepresent in this way the dependence of the individual on society. [At their
urging we delight in shouting ‘We should all feel guilty about the conditions of our
schools. We should all feel guilty about our dropping the bomb on Hiroshima:] But
the main location of the idea of collective guilt is religion—many forms of doctrines
of original sin and universal sin regard guilt as a pervasive state of mankind as a
whole.”

Speaking for myself, I think of collective guilt as a manipulative tool. It reminds
me of the communist “criticism/self-criticism” technique. Many of the precepts of
the Stoics depend on an abhorrence of the concept of collective guilt.

As you know, the Stoics believe that every man bears the exclusive responsibility
himself for his own good and own evil. That leads to their further conclusion that it
is impossible to imagine a moral order in which one person does the wrong and an-
other, the innocent, suffers. Now add all that to Epictetus’s firm belief that we are all



born with an innate conception of what is good and evil, what is noble and shame-
ful, what is becoming and unbecoming, fitting and inappropriate, what is right to
do and what is wrong. And further, remembering that all Stoic talk refers to the
inner man, what is going on “way down here,” it follows that the perpetrator of evil
pays the full price for his misdeeds in suffering the injury of knowing that he has
destroyed the good man within him.

This self-knowledge that you have betrayed yourself, destroyed yourself, is the
very worst harm that can befall a Stoic. Epictetus says:

* Noone comes to his fall because of another’s deed.

* No one is evil without loss or damage.

* Nomancan do wrong with impunity.

I call this whole personal guilt package that Epictetus relied upon “the reliability
of the retribution of the guilty conscience.” As I sometimes say, “There can be no
such thing as a ‘victim’; you can only be a victim of yourself.”

This collective guilt issue comes up in The Discourses in a very stark way. It is in
book 1, chapter 28, entitled “Concerning what things are small and what things are
great among men.” This gets into a discussion about Homer’s Iliad, but where I start
there is a cross-fire conversation between Epictetus and one of his students about
“impressions of the mind.”

The Stoics gave that name to those bursts of suggestion that flash on the screen of
your mind, usually when you're in tight straits, wooing you to believe that a crisis is
imminent and that you should accede to the suggestion immediately and take
counteraction. Stoics place great stock in man’s obligation to exercise stringent judg-
ment on whether to accept this suggestion at face value or use caution, play for
time, and see if what you first believed you were being told was an exaggeration.
Your response is both a judgmental and a moral act.

Inner tranquility is a goal of the Stoics—mainly so your soul can be calm as you
judge the impressions of your mind. The soul is like a bowl of water, the impression
like a ray of light that falls on it. When the water is disturbed, the ray of light is dis-
torted. If you judge an impression while your soul is agitated, your judgment can-
not be relied on because you are suffering from vertigo. The emotions of grief, pity,
and even affection are well-known disturbers of the soul.

Grief is the most offensive; Epictetus considered the suffering of grief an act of
evil. It is a willful act, going against the will of God to have all men share happiness.

In book 3 he says: “Now another’s grief is no concern of mine, but my own grief is.
Therefore, I will put an end at all costs to what is my own concern, for it is under
my control. And that which is another’s concern I will endeavour to check to the
best of my ability. But my effort to do so will not be made at all costs. Otherwise, I
shall be fighting against God. And the wages of fighting against God and this disobe-
dience will be paid by me, by day and by night.” He is more pliable, however, in
Enchiridion 16: “When you see anyone weeping for grief, do not disdain to accom-
modate yourself to him and, if need be, to groan with him. Take heed, however, not
to groan inwardly, too.”

Pity is also an evil; a Stoic would allow it sometimes but only for the person with
self-inflicted wounds, like the man who knows he destroyed the good man within
him. Affection gets the widest tolerance of the three; if you can love as a man witha
noble spirit, okay, but if the relationship requires you to be a slave and miserable, it
does not profit you to be affectionate.

Once you accept the impression, it becomes your conviction, subject to your will
and control. You inherit all its problems. Enchiridion 1 advises us to first ascertain if
the suggestion involves things that are up to us and if not, reject it.

The rest of the dialogue focuses on the Iliad. Epictetus makes the point to his stu-
dent that both Paris’s urge to steal Helen and her urge to let him get away with it re-
sulted from each of them accepting an “impression” that should have been rejected.
And if King Menelaus, husband of Helen, had used his head and read his impres-
sion of all this properly (i.e., that it would be a gain to be rid of a wife like Helen),
there would have been no Trojan War.

The student was astounded that such great matters (the Trojan War) could de-
pend on something so small as how one judged an impression. Epictetus, of course,
takes exception and thinks the student has it backward. The world’s truly great mat-
ters, he insists, rest in things like how a man judges his impressions, not on wars,
unless you bear personal blame. He pooh-poohs the idea of being indignant about
routine evolutions of mankind—revolutions, wars, famines—that lie “out there” as
abstractions. He says it’s like getting all upset because animals stampede, when it’s
just their nature.

The student asks: In what way does man differ from a horse?
He differs in understanding what he does, in his faculty for social action, in his



faithfulness, in his self-respect, his steadfastness, his intelligence.

Where then is man’s good and evil, in the true sense, to be found?

Just where the difference is; and if that element wherein the difference lies be
preserved and stands firm and well fortified on every side, and neither a man’s
self-respect, nor his faithfulness, nor his intelligence be destroyed, then the man
is also preserved; but if any one of these qualities be destroyed or taken by
storm, then the man also is destroyed. And it is on this that great events de-
pend.

Did not Paris come to his great fall when the Hellenes assailed Troy with
their ships, and when they were devastating the land and when his brothers
were dying?

Not at all, for no one comes to his fall because of another’s deed. He came to
his fall when he lost his self-respect, his faithfulness, his decency of behavior.

When did Achilles fall? Was it when Patroclus died?

God forbid; it was when he was angry, when he cried for a trumpery maiden,
when he forgot that he was there not to win lady-loves, but to make war. These
are men’s failures, this is their seige, this is their razed city, when their right
judgments are broken to the ground, and when they are destroyed. What else
happened to Agamemnon or Achilles, but that they should do and suffer such
evils because they followed their impressions? What name do we give to those
who follow everything that comes to their head?

Madmen

Well, is that not what so many men do?

Men get what they deserve. If they do evil, they pay; if they misjudge their im-
pressions, they pay. Eureka! There is a moral economy in the universe! How ironic,
totally ironic, that I should be drawn to Phil Rhinelander’s class by my fascination
with his theory that no moral economy existed, and then, years later, after several
trips around the world, after becoming enamored of the book that I was to remem-
ber him by, through it, I come to a conclusion that is the exact antithesis of his orig-
inal proposition!

I exaggerate. It’s easy to explain. It’s the difference of point of view. His hypoth-
esis rested on the distribution of riches versus poverty, health versus illness, plush
living versus prison living. All externals. All what a true Stoic is indifferent to. What

the Stoic is interested in is all “inside” his breast; the man in the street is interested
in what is outside—material things. “What is the fruit of your doctrines?” Epictetus
was asked. His reply was three crisp words: “Tranquility, Fearlessness, and Free-

dom.” I'll never let go of that. I’ve moved “inside.”

After I came home from prison, I was on a speakers’ program with the philoso-
pher Will Durant. We had several good conversations that weekend, and he was
quite interested in my taking up Stoicism. He thought I had it right. P’'ll close with a
quotation from his Life of Greece (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1939).

Stoicism was a noble philosophy and proved more practicable than a mod-
ern cynic would expect. It brought together all the elements of Greek thought
in a final effort of the pagan mind to create a system of morals acceptable to
the classes that had abandoned the ancient creed; and though it naturally won
only a small minority to its standards, those few were everywhere the best.
Like its Christian counterparts, Calvinism and Puritanism, it produced the
strongest characters of its time. Theoretically it was a monstrous doctrine of an
isolated and pitiless perfectionism. Actually it created men of courage, and
saintliness, and goodwill, like Marcus Aurelius, Epictetus, Cato the Younger. It
influenced Roman jurisprudence and the building of a law of nations, and it
helped to hold ancient society together until a new faith came.

Thank you.



