                                   14
                  The Nature of the Virtues


One response to the history which I have narrated so far might well be
to suggest that even within the relatively coherent tradition of thought
which I have sketched there are just too many different and incompatible
conceptions of a virtue for there to be any real unity to the concept or
indeed to the history. Homer. Sophocles. Aristotle. the New Testament
and medieval thinkers differ from each other in too many ways. They offer
us different and incompatible lists of the virtues; they give a different rank
order of importance to different virtues; and they have different and in-
compatible theories of the virtues. If we were to consider later Western
writers on the virtues. the list of differences and incompatibilities would
be enlarged still further; and if we extended our enquiry to Japanese, say,
or American Indian cultures, the differences would become greater still. It
would be all too easy to conclude that there are a number of rival and alter-
native conceptions of the virtues, but, even within the tradition which I
 have been delineating, no single core conception .
    The case for such a conclusion could not be better constructed than by
 beginning from a consideration of the very different lists of items which
 different authors in different times and places have included in their
 catalogues of virtues. Some of these catalogues-Horner's, Aristotle's and
 the New Testament's-I have already noticed at greater or lesser length .
 Let me at the risk of some repetition recall some of their key features and
 then introduce for further comparison the catalogues of twO later Western
 writers, Benjamin Franklin and Jane Austen.
    The first example is that of Homer. At least some of the items in a
 Homeric list of the aretai would clearly not be counted by most of us
 nowadays as virtues at all, physical strength being the most obvious exam-
 ple. To this it might be replied that perhaps we ought not to translate the
 word arete in Homer by our word 'virtue', but instead by our word 'ex-
 cellence'; and perhaps, if we were so to translate it, the apparently surpris-
 ing difference between Homer and ourselves would at first sight have been
  removed. For we could allow without any kind of oddity that the posses-
 sion of physical strength is the possession of an excellence. But in fact we
  would not have removed, but instead would merely have relocated, the
182                              After Virtue

difference between Homer and ourselves. For we would now seem to be
saying that Homer's concept of an arae, an excellence, is one thing and
that our concept of a virtue is quite another since a particular quality can
be an excellence in Homer's eyes, but not a virtue in ours and vice versa.
     But of course it is not that Homer's list of virtues differs only from our
own; it also notably differs from Aristotle's. And Aristotle's of course also
differs from our own . For one thing, as I noticed earlier, some Greek
virtue-words are not easily translated into English or rather out of Greek.
Moreover consider the importance of friendship as a virtue in Aristotle's
list - how different from us' Or the place of pbronesis - how different from
Homer and from us! The mind receives from Aristotle the kind of tribute
which the body receives from Homer. But it is not just the case that the
difference between Aristotle and Homer lies in the inclusion of some items
and the omission of others in their respective catalogues. It turns out also
in the way in which those catalogues are ordered , in which items are rank-
ed as relatively central to human excellence and whi<:h marginal.
     Moreover the relati~nship of virtues to the social order has changed.
For Homer the paradigm of human excellence is the warrior; for Aristotle
 it is the Athenian gentleman. Indeed according to Aristotle certain virtues
 are only available to those of great riches and of high social status; there
 are virtues which are unavailable to the poor man , even if he is a free man .
 And those virtues are on Aristotle's view ones central to human life; mag-
 nanimity-and once again , any translation of megaLopsucbia is unsatisfac-
 tory-and munificence are not just virtues, but important virtues within
 the Aristotelian scheme.
     At once it is impossible to delay the remark that the most striking con-
 trast with Aristotle's catalogue is to be found neither in Homer's nor in
 our own, but in the New Testament's. For the New Testament not only
 praises virtues of which Aristotle knows nothing-faith , hope and love-
 and says nothing about virtues such as pbronesis which are crucial for
  Aristotle, but it praises at least one quality as a virtue which Aristotle seems
 to count as one of the vices relative to magnanimity, namely humility.
  Moreover since the New Testament quite dearly sees the rich as destined
  for the pains of Hell, it is clear that the key virtues cannot be available to
  them ; yet they are available to slaves. And the New Testament of course
  differs from both Homer and Aristotle not only in the items included in
  its catalogue, but once again in its rank ordering of the virtues.
      Turn now to compare all three lists of virtues considered so far-the
  Homeric, the Aristotelian, and the New Testament's-with two much
  later lists, one which can be compiled from Jane Austen's novels and the
  other which Benjamin Franklin constructed for himself. Two features
                            The Nature of tbe Virtues                        183

stand out in Jane Austen's list . The first is the importance that she allots
to the virtue which she calls 'constancy', a virtue about which I shall say
more in a later chapter. In some ways constancy plays a role in Jane Austen
analogous to that of pbronesis in Aristotle; it is a virtue the possession of
which is a prerequisite for the possession of other virtues. The second is
the fact that what Aristotle treats as the virtue of agreeableness (a virtue
for which he says there is no name) she treats as only the simulacrum of
a genuine virtue-the genuine virtue in question is the one she calls
amiability. For the man who practices agreeableness does so from con-
siderations of honor and expediency, according to Aristotle; whereas Jane
Austen thought it possible and necessary for the possessor of that virtue
to have a certain real affection for people as such . (It matters here that Jane
Austen is a Christian.) Remember that Aristotle himself had treated
 military courage as a simulacrum of true courage. Thus we find here yet
another type of disagreement over the virtues; namely, one as to which
 human qualities are genuine virtues and which mere simulacra.
     In Benjamin Franklin's list we flOd almost all the types of difference
 from at least one of the catalogues we have considered and one more.
 Franklin includes virtues which are new to our consideration such as
 cleanliness, silence and industry; he clearly considers the drive to acquire
 itself a part of virtue, whereas for most ancient Greeks this is the vice of
 pleonexia; he treats some virtues which earlier ages had considered minor
 as major; but he also redefines some familiar virtues. In the list of thirteen
 virtues which Franklin compiled as part of his system of private moral ac-
 counting, he elucidates each virtue by citing a maxim obedience to which
 is the virtue in question. In the case of chastity the maxim is 'Rarely use
 venery but for health or offspring - never to dullness, weakness or the in-
 jury of your own or another's peace or reputation'. This is clearly not what
 earlier writers had meant by 'chastity'.
     We have therefore accumulated a startling number of differences and
  incompatibilities in the five stated and implied accounts of the virtues. So
 the question which I raised at the outset becomes more urgent. If different
  writers in different times and places, but all within the history of Western
  culture, include such different sets and types of items in their lists, what
  grounds have we for supposing that they do indeed aspire to list items of
  one and the same kind , that there is any shared concept at all? A second
  kind of consideration reinforces the presumption of a negative answer to
  this question. It is not just that each of these five writers lists different and
  differing kinds of items; it is also that each of these lists embodies, is the
  expression of a different theory about what a virtue is.
      In the Homeric poems a virtue is a quality the manifestation of which
 184                               After Virtue

  enables someone to do exactly what their well-defined social role requires.
  The primary role is that of the warrior king and that Homer lists those
  virtues which he does becomes intelligible at once when we recognize that
  the key virtues therefore must be those which enable a man to excel in
  combat and in the games. It follows that we cannot identify the Homeric
  virtues until we have first identified the key social roles in Homeric society
 and the requirements of each of them. The concept of wbat anyone filling
 sucb-and-sucb a role ougbt to do is prior to the concept of a virtue; the latter
 concept has application only via the former.
     On Aristotle's account matters are very different. Even though some vir-
 tues are available only to certain types of people, nonetheless virtues attach
 not to men as inhabiting social roles, but to man as such. It is the telos of
 man as a species which determines what human qualities are virtues. We
 need to remember however that although Aristotle treats the acquisition
 and exercise of the virtues as means to an end, the relationship of means
 to end is internal and not external. I call a means internal to a given end
 when the end cannot be adequately characterized independently of a char-
acterization of the means. So it is with the virtues and the te/os which is
the good life for man on Aristotle's account. The exercise of the virtues
is itself a crucial component of the good life for man. This distinction be-
tween internal and external means to an end is not drawn by Aristotle
himself in the Nicomacbean Ethics, as I noticed earlier, but it is an essential
distinction to be drawn if we are to understand what Aristotle intended.
The distinction is drawn explicitly by Aquinas in the course of his defence
of St. Augustine's definition of a virtue, and it is clear that Aquinas under-
stood that in drawing it he was maintaining an Aristotelian point of view.
    The New Testament's account of the virtues, even if it differs as much
as it does in content from Aristotle's - Aristotle would certainly not have
admired Jesus Christ and he would have been horrified by St Paul- does
have the same logical and conceptual structure as Aristotle's account. A vir-
tue is, as with Aristotle, a quality the exercise of which leads to the achieve-
ment of the human telos. The good for man is of course a supernatural and
not only a natural good, but supernature redeems and completes nature.
Moreover the relationship of virtues as means to the end which is human
incorporation in the divine kingdom of the age to come is internal and not
external, just as it is in Aristotle. It is of course this parallelism which allows
Aquinas to synthesize Aristotle and the New Testament. A key feature of
this parallelism is the way in which the concept of tbe good lift for man is
prior to the concept of a virtue in just the way in which on the Homeric
account the concept of a social role was prior. Once again it is the way in
which the former concept is applied which determines how the latter is
                           Tbe Nature of tbe Virtues                         185

to be applied . In both cases the concept of a virtue is a secondary concept.
    The intent of Jane Austen's theory of the virtues is of another kind .
C.S . Lewis has rightly emphasized how profoundly Christian her moral
vision is and Gilbert Ryle has equally rightly emphasized her inheritance
from Shaftesbury and from Aristotle. In fact her views combine elements
from Homer as well, since she is concerned with social roles in a way that
neither the New Testament nor Aristotle are . She is therefore important
for the way in which she finds it possible to combine what are at first sight
disparate theorectical accounts of the virtues. But for the moment any at-
tempt to assess the significance of Jane Austen's systhesis must be delayed.
Instead we must notice the quite different style of theory articulated in
Benjamin Franklin's account of the virtues.
    Franklin's account , like Aristotle's, is teleological; but unlike Aristotle's,
it is utilitarian. According to Franklin in his Autobiography the virtues are
means to an end, but he envisages the means-ends relationship as external
 rather than internal. The end to which the cultivation of the virtues
 ministers is happiness, but happiness understood as success, prosperity in
 Philadelphia and ultimately in heaven . The virtues are to be useful and
 Franklin's account continuously stresses utility as a criterion in individual
 cases: 'Make no expence but to do good to others or yourself; i.e. waste
 nothing', 'Speak not but what may benefit others or yourself. Avoid trifling
 conversation' and, as we have already seen, 'Rarely use venery but for
 health or offspring .. .'. When Franklin was in Paris he was horrified by
 Parisian architecture: 'Marble, porcelain and gilt are squandered without
 utility.'
     We thus have at least three very different conceptions of a virtue to con-
 front: a virtue is a quality which enables an individual to discharge his or
 her social role (Homer); a virtue is a quality which enables an individual
 to move towards the achievement of the specifically human telos, whether
 natural or supernatural (Aristotle, the New Testament and Aquinas); a vir-
 tue is a quality which has utility in achieving earthly and heavenly success
 (Franklin). Are we to take these as three different rival accounts of the
 same thing? Or are they instead accounts of three different things? Perhaps
 the moral structures in archaic Greece, in fourth-century Greece , and in
  eighteenth-century Pennsylvannia were so different from each other that
  we should treat them as embodying quite different concepts, whose dif-
  ference is initially disguised from us by the historical accident of an in-
  herited vocabulary which misleads us by linguistic resemblance long after
  conceptual identity and similarity have failed. Our intitial question has
  come back to us with redoubled force.
     Yet although I have dwelt upon the prima facie case for holding that the
186                               AjuT Virtue

differences and incompatibilities between different accounts at least suggest
 that there is no single, central, core conception of the virtues which might
 make a claim for universal allegiance, I ought also to point out that each
of the five moral accounts which I have sketched so summarily does em-
 body just such a claim. It is indeed just this feature of those accounts that
 makes them of more than sociological or antiquarian interest . Every one
 of these accounts claims not only theoretical, but also an institutional
 hegemony. For Odysseus the Cyclopes stand condemned because they lack
 agriculture, an agora and tbemis . For Aristotle the barbarians stand con-
 demned because they lack the polis and are therefore incapable of politics.
 For New Testament Christians there is no salvation outside the apostolic
 church. And we know that Benjamin Franklin found the virtues more at
  home in Philadelphia than in Paris and that for Jane Austen the touchstone
 of the virtues is a certain kind of marriage and indeed a certain kind of
  naval officer (that is, a certain kind of English naval officer).
     The question can therefore now be posed directly: are we or are we not
  able to disentangle from these rival and various claim!; a unitary core con-
  cept of the virtues of which we can give a more compelling account than
  any of the other accounts so far? I am going to argue that we can in fact
  discover such a core concept and that it turns out to provide the tradition
  of which I have written the history with its conceptual unity. It will indeed
  enable us to distinguish in a clear way those beliefs about the virtues which
  genuinely belong to the tradition from those which do not. Unsurprisingly
  perhaps it is a complex concept, different parts of which derive from dif-
  ferent stages in the development of the tradition. Thus the concept itself
  in some sense embodies the history of which it is the outcome.
     One of the features of the concept of a virtue which has emerged with
 some clarity from the argument so far is that it always requires for its ap-
 plication the acceptance for some prior account of certain features of social
 and moral life in terms of which it has to be defined and explained. So
 in the Homeric account the concept of a virtue is secondary to that of a
 social roie, in Aristotle's account it is secondary to that of the good lift for
man conceived as the telos of human action and in Franklin's much later
account it is secondary to that of utility. What is it in the account which
I am about to give which provides in a similar way the necessary back-
ground against which the concept of a virtue has to be made intelligible?
It is in answering this question that the complex, historical, multi-layered
character of the core concept of virtue becomes clear. For there are no less
than three stages in the logical development of the concept which have to
be identified in order, if the core conception of a virtue is to be under-
stood, and each of these stages has its own conceptual background . The
                            The Nature of the Virtues                          187


first stage requires a background account of what I shall call a practice,
the second an account of what I have already characterized as the narrative
order of a singie human life and the third an account a good deal fuller
than I have given up to now of what constitutes a moral tradition. Each
later stage presupposes the earlier, but not vice versa . Each earlier stage is
both modified by and reinterpreted in the light of, but also provides an
essential constituent of each later stage. The progress in the development
of the concept is closely related to, although it does not recapitulate in any
straightforward way , the history of the tradition of which it forms the
core.
     In the Homeric account of the virtues-and in heroic societies more
generally-the exercise of a virtue exhibits qualities which are required for
sustaining a social role and for exhibiting excellence in some well-marked
area of social practice: to excel is to excel at war or in the games, as Achilles
does, in sustaining a household, as Penelope does, in giving counsel in the
 assembly, as Nestor does, in the telling of a tale, as Homer himself does .
 When Aristotle speaks of excellence in human activity, he sometimes
 though not always, refers to some well-defined type of human practice :
 flute-playing, or war, or geometry. I am going to suggest that this notion
 of a particular type of practice as providing the arena in which the virtues
 are exhibited and in terms of which they are to receive their primary, if
 incomplete, definition is crucial to the whole enterprise of identifying a
 core concept of the virtues. I hasten to add two caveats however.
     The first is to point out that my argument will not in any way imply
 that virtues are only exercised in the course of what I am calling practices.
 The second is to warn that I shall be using the word 'practice' in a specially
 defined way which does not completely agree with current ordinary usage,
 including my own previous use of that word. What am I going to mean
 by it?
      By a 'practice' I am going to mean any coherent and complex form of
 socially established cooperative human activity through which goods inter-
  nal to that form of activity are realized in the course of trying to achieve
 those standards of excellence which are appropriate to, and partially
  definitive of, that form of activity, with the result that human powers to
  achieve excellence, and human conceptions of the ends and goods in-
  volved, are systematically extended . Tic-tac-toe is not an example of a prac-
  tice in this sense, nor is throwing a football with skill; but the game of foot-
  ball is, and so is chess. Bricklaying is not a practice; architecture is. Planting
  turnips is not a practice; farming is. So are the enquiries of physics,
  chemistry and biology, and so is the work of the historian, and so are
  painting and music. In the ancient and medieval worlds the creation and
188                              After Virtue

sustaining of human communtities - of households, cities, nations-is gen-
erally taken to be a practice in the sense in which I have defined it. Thus
the range of practices is wide: am, sciences, games, politics in the Aris-
totelian sense, the making and sustaining of family life, all fall under the
concept. But the question of the precise range of practices is not at this
stage of the first importance. Instead let me explain some of the key terms
involved in my definition, beginning with the notion of goods internal to
a practice.
    Consider the example of a highly intelligent seven-year-old child whom
I wish to teach to play chess, although the child has no particular desire
to learn the game. The child does however have a very strong desire for
candy and little chance of obtaining it . I therefore tell the child that if the
child will play chess with me once a week I will give the child 50 cents
worth of candy; moreover I tell the child that I will always play in such
a way that it will be difficult, but not impossible, for the child to win and
that, if the child wins, the child will receive an extra 50 cents worth of
candy. Thus motivated the child plays and plays to win. Notice however
that, so long as it is the candy alone which provides the child with a good
reason for playing chess, the child has no reason not to cheat and every
reason to cheat, provided he or she can do so successfully. But, so we may
hope , there will come a time when the child will find in those goods spe-
cific to chess, in the achievement of a certain highly particular kind of
analytical skill, strategic imagination and competitive intensity, a new set
of reasons, reasons now not just for winning on a particular occasion, but
 for trying to excel in whatever way the game of chess demands. Now if
 the child cheats, he or she will be defeating not me, but himself or herself.
    There are thus two kinds of good possibly to be gained by playing chess.
 On the one hand there are those goods externally and contingently at-
 tached to chess-playing and to other practices by the accidents of social
 circumstance- in the case of the imaginary child candy, in the case of real
 adults such goods as prestige, status and money . There are always alter-
 native ways for achieving such goods, and their achievement is never to
 be had only by engaging in some particular kind of practice. On the other
 hand there are the goods internal to the practice of chess which cannot be
 had in any way but by playing chess or some other game of that specific
 kind. We call them internal for two reasons: first, as I have already sug-
 gested, because we can only specify them in terms of chess or some other
 game of that specific kind and by means of examples from such games
 (otherwise the meagerness of our vocabulary for speaking of such goods
 forces us into such devices as my own resort to writing of 'a certain highly
 particular kind of); and secondly because they can only be identified and
                           The Nature of tbe Virtues                       18 9

recognized by the experience of participating in the practice in question.
Those who lack the relevant experience are incompetent thereby as judges
of internal goods.
     This is clearly the case with all the major examples of practices: consider
for example-even if briefly and inadequately-the practice of portrait
painting as it developed in Western Europe from the late middle ages to
the eighteenth century . The successful portrait painter is abie to achieve
many goods which are in the sense just defined external to the practice of
portrait painting-fame, wealth , social status, even a measure of power and
influence at courts upon occasion. But those external goods are not to be
confused with the goods which are internal to the practice . The internal
goods are those which result from an extended attempt to show how Witt-
genstein's dictum The human body is the best picture of the human soul'
(Investigations , p. 178e) might be made to become true by teaching us 'to
regard .. . the picture on our wall as the object itself (the men landscape
and so on) depicted there' (p. 205e) in a quite new way What ismisleading
about Wittgenstein's dictum as it stands is its neglect of the truth in George
Orwell's thesis 'At fifty everyone has the face he deserves'. Whu painters
 from Giotto to Rembrandt learnt to show was how the face at any age
 may be revealed as the face that the subject of a portrait deserles.
     Originally in medieval paintings of the saints the face was an ,con ; the
 question of a resemblance between the depicted face of Christ or St. Peter
 and the face that Jesus or Peter actually possessed at some partidar age
 did not even arise. The antithesis to this iconography was the relative
 naturalism of certain fifteenth-century Flemish and German paintir.g. The
 heavy eyelids, the coifed hair, the lines around the mouth undeniably
 represent some particular woman, either actual or envisaged. Resemblance
 has usurped the iconic relationship. But with Rembrandt there is, so to
 speak, synthesis: the naturalistic portrait is now rendered as an icon, but
 an icon of a new and hitherto inconceivable kind. Similarly in a very dif-
 ferent kind of sequence mythological faces in a certain kind of seventeenth-
 century French painting become aristocratic faces in the eighteenth cen-
 tury. Within each of these sequences at least two different kinds of good
  internal to the painting of human faces and bodies are achieved .
      There is first of all the excellence of the products, both the excellence
  in performance by the painters and that of each portrait itself. This ex-
  cellence-the very verb 'excel' suggests it-has to be understood histori-
  cally . The sequences of development find their point and purpose in a pro-
  gress towards and beyond a variety of types and modes of excellence.
  There are of course sequences of decline as well as of progress, and progress
  is rarely to be understood as straightforwardly linear. But it is in participa-
190                              After Virtue

tion in the attempts to sustain progress and to respond creatively to prob-
lems that the second kind of good internal to the practices of ponrait paint-
ing is to be found. For what the anist discovers within the pursuit of ex-
cellence in ponrait painting-and what is true of ponrait painting is true
of the practice of the fine ans in general- is the good of a cenain kind of
life. That life may not constitute the whole of life for someone who is a
painter by a very long way or it may at least for a period. Gauguin-like.
absorb him or her at the expense of almost everything else. But it is the
painter's living out of a greater or lesser pan of his or her life as a painter
that is the second kind of good internal to painting. And judgment upon
these goods requires at the very least the kind of competence that is only
to be acquired either as a painter or as someone willing to learn system-
atically what the ponrait painter has to teach.
     A practice involves standards of excellence and obedience to rules as
well as the achievement of goods. To enter into a practice is to accept the
 authority of those standards and the inadequacy of my own performance
as judged by them. It is to subject my own attitudes, choices, preferences
 and tastes to the standards which currently and panially define the prac-
 tice. Practices of course, as I have just noticed, have a history: games,
 sciences and ans all have histories. Thus the standards are not themselves
 immune from criticism, but nonetheless we cannot be initiated into a prac-
 tice without accepting the authority of the best standards realized so far.
 If, on staning to listen to music, I do not accept my own incapacity to
 judge correctly, I will never learn to hear, let alone to appreciate, Banok's
 last quanets. If, on staning to play baseball, I do not accept that others
 know better than I when to throw a fast ball and when not, I will never
 learn to appreciate good pitching let alone to pitch . In the realm of prac-
 tices the authority of both goods and standards operates in such a way as
 to rule out all subjectivist and emotivist analyses of judgment. De gustibus
 est disputandum.
      We are now in a position to notice an imponant difference between
 what I have called internal and what I have called external goods. It is
  characteristic of what I have called external goods that when achieved they
  are always some individual's propeny and possession. Moreover character-
  istically they are such that the more someone has of them, the less there
  is for other people. This is sometimes necessarily the case, as with power
 and fame, and sometimes the case by reason of contingent circumstance
 as with money. External goods are therefore characteristically objects of
 competition in which there must be losers as well as winners. Internal
 goods are indeed the outcome of competition to excel, but it is charac-
 teristic of them that their achievement is a good for the whole community
                              The Nature of the Virtues                           191

who panicipate in the practice. So when Turner transformed the seascape
in painting or W. G. Grace advanced the an of batting in cricket in a quite
new way their achievement enriched the whole relevant community.
    But what does all or any of this have to do with the concept of the vir-
tues? It turns out that we are now in a position to formulate a first, even
if panial and tentative definition of a vinue: A virtue is an acquired human
quality the possession and exercise of which tends to enable us to achieve those goods
which are internal to practices and the Jack of which effictively prevents us from
achieving any such goods. Later this definition will need amplification and
amendment . But as a first approximation to an adequate definition it
already illuminates the place of the vinues in human life. For it is not dif-
ficult to show for a whole range of key vinues that without them the
goods internal to practices are barred to us, but not just barred to us
generally, barred in a very panicular way.
    It belongs to the concept of a practice as I have outlined it - and as we
are all familiar with it already in our actual lives, whether we are painters
or physicists or quanerbacks or indeed just lovers of good painting or first-
rate experiments or a well-thrown pass-that its goods can only be
achieved by subordinating ourselves within the practice in our relationship
to other practitioners. We have to learn to recognize what is due to whom;
we have to be prepared to take whatever self-endangering risks are
demanded along the way; and we have to listen carefully to what we are
told about our own inadequacies and to reply with the same carefulness
for the facts. In other words we have to accept as necessary components
of any practice with internal goods and standards of excellence the vinues
of justice, courage and honesty. For not to accept these, to be willing to
 cheat as our imagined child was willing to cheat in his or her early days
 at chess, so far bars us from achieving the standards of excellence or the
 goods internal to the practice that it renders the practice pointless except
 as a device for achieving external goods.
    We can put the same point in another way. Every practice requires a
 cenain kind of relationship between those who panicipate in it. Now the
 vinues are those goods by reference to which, whether we like it or not ,
 we define our relationships to those other people with whom we share the
 kind of purposes and standards which inform practices. Consider an exam-
 ple of how reference to the vinues has to be made in cenain kinds of
 human relationship.
     A, B, C, and D are friends in that sense of friendship which Aristotle
 takes to be primary: they share in the pursuit of cenain goods. In my terms
 they share in a practice. D dies in obscure circumstances. A discovers how
 D died and tells the truth about it to B while lying to C. C discovers the
192                              After Virtue

lie. What A cannot then intelligibly claim is that he stands in the same rela-
tionship of friendship to both B and C By telling the truth to one and
lying to the other he has partially defined a difference in the relationship.
Of course it is open to A to explain this difference in a number of ways;
perhaps he was trying to spare C pain or perhaps he is simply cheating C
But some difference in the relationship now exists as a result of the lie. For
their allegiance to each other in the pursuit of common goods has been
put in question.
    Just as, so long as we share the standards and purposes characteristic of
 practices, we define our relationship to each other, whether we acknowl-
 edge it or not, by reference to standards of truthfulness and trust, so we
 define them too by reference to standards of justice and of courage. If A,
 a professor, gives B and C the grades that their papers deserve, but grades
 D because he is attracted by D's blue eyes or is repelled by D's dandruff,
 he has defined his relationship to D differently from his relationship to the
 other members of the class, whether he wishes it or not. Justice requires
 that we treat others in respect of merit or desert according to uniform and
 impersonal standards; to depart from the standards of justice in some par-
 ticular instance defines our relationship with the relevant person as in some
 way special or distinctive.
     The case with courage is a little different. We hold courage to be a vir-
 tue because the care and concern for individuals, communities and causes
 which is so crucial to so much in practices requires the existence of such
 a virtue. If someone says that he cares for some individual, community or
 cause, but is unwilling to risk harm or danger on his, her or its own behalf,
  he puts in question the genuineness of his care and concern. Courage, the
  capacity to risk harm or danger to oneself, has its role in human life be-
  cause of this connection with care and concern. This is not to say that a
  man cannot genuinely care and also be a coward. It is in part to say that
  a man who genuinely cares and has not the capacity for risking harm or
  danger has to define himself, both to himself and to others, as a coward.
     I take it then that from the standpoint of those types of relationship
  without which practices cannot be sustained truthfulness, justice and cour-
  age-and perhaps some others-are genuine excellences, are virtues in the
  light of which we have to characterize ourselves and others, whatever our
  private moral standpoint or our society's particular codes may be. For this
  recognition that we cannot escape the definition of our relationships in
  terms of such goods is perfectly compatible with the acknowledgment that
  different societies have and have had different codes of truthfulness, justice
  and courage. Lutheran pietists brought up their children to believe that one
  ought to tell the truth to everybody at all times, whatever the circum-
                           The Nature of tbe Virtues                        193

stances or consequences, and Kant was one of their children . Traditional
Bantu parents brought up their children not to tell the truth to unknown
strangers, since they believed that this could render the family vulnerable
to witchcraft. In our culture many of us have been brought up not to tell
the truth to elderly great-aunts who invite us to admire their new hats. But
each of these codes embodies an acknowledgment of the virtue of truthful-
ness. So it is also with varying codes of justice and of courage.
     Practices then might flourish in societies with very different codes; what
they could not do is flourish in societies in which the virtues were not
valued , although institutions and technical skills serving unified purposes
might well continue to flourish. (l shall have more to say about the con-
trast between institutions and technical skills mobilized for a unified end,
on the one hand, and practices on the other, in a moment .) For the kind
of cooperation, the kind of recognition of authority and of achievement,
the kind of respect for standards and the kind of risk-taking which are
characteristically involved in practices demand for example fairness in judg-
 ing oneself and others-the kind of fairness absent in my example of the
 professor, a ruthless truthfulness without which fairness cannot find appli-
 cation-the kind of truthfulness absent in my example of A, B, C, and 0-
 and willingness to trust the judgments of those whose achievement in the
 practice give them an authority to judge which presupposes fairness and
 truthfulness in those judgments, and from time to time the taking of self-
 endangering and even achievement-endangering risks. It is no part of my
 thesis that great violinists cannot be vicious or great chess-players mean-
 spirited. Where the virtues are required, the vices also may flourish. It is
 just that the vicious and mean-spirited necessarily rely on the virtues of
 others for the practices in which they engage to flourish and also deny
 themselves the experience 'of achieving those internal goods which may
  reward even not very good chess-players and violinists.
     To situate the virtues any further within practices it is necessary now
  to clarify a little further the nature of a practice by drawing two important
  contrasts. The discussion so far I hope makes it clear that a practice, in the
  sense intended, is never just a set of technical skills, even when directed
  towards some unified purpose and even if the exercise of those skills can
  on occasion be valued or enjoyed for their own sake. What is distinctive
  in a practice is in part the way in which conceptions of the relevant goods
  and ends which the technical skills serve-and every practice does require
  the exercise of technical skills - are transformed and enriched by these ex-
  tensions of human powers and by that regard for its own internal goods
  which are partially definitive of each particular practice or type of practice.
   Practices never have a goal or goals fixed for all time-painting has no such
194                              After Virtue

goal nor has physics-but the goals themselves are transmuted by the
history of the activity. It therefore turns out not to be accidental that every
practice has its own history and a history which is more and other than
that of the improvement of the relevant technical skills. This historical
dimension is crucial in relation to the virtues.
    To enter into a practice is to enter into a relationship not only with its
contemporary practitioners, but also with those who have preceded us in
the practice, particularly those whose achievements extended the reach of
the practice to its present point. It is thus the achievement, and a fortiori
the authority, of a tradition which I then confront and from which I have
to learn . And for this learning and the relationship to the past which it em-
bodies the virtues of justice, courage and truthfulness are prerequisite in
precisely the same way and for precisely the same reasons as they are in
sustaining present relationships within practices.
    It is not only of course with sets of technical skills that practices ought
to be contrasted. PractKes must not be confused with institutions. Chess,
physics and medicine are practices; chess clubs, laboratories, universities
and hospitals are institutions. Institutions are characteristically and neces-
sarily concerned with what I have called external goods. They are involved
 in acquiring money and other material goods; they are structured in terms
of power and status, and they distribute money, power and status as re-
wards. Nor could they do otherwise if they are to sustain not only them-
selves, but also the practices of which they are the bearers. For no practices
can survive for any length of time unsustained by institutions. Indeed so
 intimate is the relationship of practices to institutions-and consequently
of the goods external to the goods internal to the practices in question-
 that institutions and practices characteristically form a single causal order
 in which the ideals and the creativity of the practice are always vulnerable
to the acquisitiveness of the institution, in which the cooperative care for
common goods of the practice is always vulnerable to the competitiveness
of the institution. In this context the essential function of the virtues is
clear. Without them, without justice, courage and truthfulness, practices
could not resist the corrupting power of institutions.
    Yet if institutions do have corrupting power, the making and sustaining
of forms of human community - and therefore of institutions- itself has all
the characteristics of a practice, and moreover of a practice which stands
in a peculiarly close relationship to the exercise of the virtues in two impor-
tant ways. T\:le exercise of the virtues is itself apt to require a highly deter-
minate attitude to social and political issues; and it is always within some
particular community with its own specific institutional forms that we
                           The Nature of the Virtues                        195

learn or fail to learn to exercise the virtues. There is of course a crucial dif-
ference between the way in which the relationship between moral character
and political community is envisaged from the standpoint of liberal indi-
vidualist modernity and the way in which that relationship was envisaged
from the standpoint of the type of ancient and medieval tradition of the
virtues which I have sketched. For liberal individualism a community is
simply an arena in which individuals each pursue their own self-chosen
conception of the good life, and political institutions exist to provide that
degree of order which makes such self-determined activity possible. Gov-
ernment and law are, or ought to be, neutral between rival concept ' IS
of the good life for man , and hence, although it is the task of governmt:nt
to promote law-abidingness, it is on the liberal view no part of the legiti-
 mate function of government to inculcate anyone moral outlook.
     By contrast, on the particular ancient and medieval view which I have
 sketched political community not only requires the exercise of the virtues
 for its own sustenance, but it is one of the tasks of parental authority to
 make children grow up so as to be virtuous adults. The classical statement
 of this analogy is by Socrates in the CTiw. It does not of course follow from
 an acceptance of the Socratic view of political community and political
 authority that we ought to assign to the modern state the moral function
 which Socrates assigned to the city and its laws. Indeed the power of the
 liberal individualist standpoint partly derives from the evident fact that the
 modern state is indeed totally unfitted to act as moral educator of any com-
 munity. But the history of how the modern state emerged is of course itself
 a moral history. If my account of the complex relationship of virtues to
 practices and to institutions is correct, it follows that we shall be unable
 to write a true history of practices and institutions unless that history is
 also one of the virtues and vices. For the ability of a practice to retain its
 integrity will depend on the way in which the virtues can be and are exer-
 cised in sustaining the institutional forms which are the social bearers of
 the practice. The integrity of a practice causally requires the exercise of the
  virtues by at least some of the individuals who embody it in their activities;
  and conversely the corruption of institutions is always in part at least an
  effect of the vices .
     The virtues are of course themselves in turn fostered by certain types
  of social institution and endangered by others. Thomas Jefferson thought
  that only in a society of small farmers could the virtues flourish; and Adam
  Ferguson with a good deal more sophistication saw the institutions of
  modern commercial society as endangering at least some traditional vir-
  tues. It is Ferguson's type of sociology which is the empirical counterpart
196                               After Virtue

of the conceptual account of the virtues which I have given. a sociology
which aspires to lay bare the empirical. causal connection between virtues.
practices and institutions. For this kind of conceptual account has strong
empirical implications; it provides an explanatory scheme which can be
tested in particular cases. Moreover my thesis has empirical content in an-
other way; it does entail that without the virtues there could be a recogni-
tion only of what I have called external goods and not at all of internal
goods in the context of practices. And in any society which recognized
only external goods competitiveness would be the dominant and even ex-
clusive feature. We have a brilliant portrait of such a society in Hobbes's
account of the state of nature; and Professor Turnbull's report of the fate
of the Ik suggests that social reality does in the most horrifying way con-
firm both my thesis and Hobbes·s.
    Virtues then stand in a different relationship to external and to internal
goods. The possession of the virtues-and not only of their semblance and
sim ulacra - is necessary to achieve the latter; yet the possession of the vir-
tues may perfectly well hinder us in achieving external goods. I need to
emphasize at this point that external goods genuinely are goods. Not only
are they characteristic objects of human desire. whose allocation is what
gives point to the virtues of justice and of generosity, but no one can de-
spise them altogether without a certain hypocrisy. Yet notoriously the
cultivation of truthfulness, justice and courage will often. the world being
what it contingently is, bar us from being rich or famous or powerful.
Thus although we may hope that we can not only achieve the standards
of excellence and the internal goods of certain practices by possessing the
virtues and become rich, famous and powerful. the virtues are always a
 potential stumbling block to this comfortable ambition. We should there-
 fore expect that, if in a particular society the pursuit of external goods were
to become dominant. the concept of the virtues might suffer first attrition
 and then perhaps something near total effacement, although simulacra
 might abound.
    The time has come to ask the question of how far this partial account
 of a core conception of the virtues-and I need to emphasize that all that
 I have offered so far is the first stage of such an account - is faithful to the
 tradition which I delineated. How far, for example, and in what ways is
 it Aristotelian? It is- happily- not Aristotelian in two ways in which a
 good deal of the rest of the tradition also dissents from Aristotle. First,
 although this account of the virtues is teleological, it does not require any
 allegiance to Aristotle's metaphysical biology. And secondly, just because
 of the multiplicity of human practices and the consequent multiplicity of
 goods in the pursuit of which the virtues may be exercised-goods which
                           The Nature of the ViTtUes                       197

will often be contingently incompatible and which will therefore make
rival claims upon our allegiance-conflict will not spring solely from flaws
in individual character. But it was just on these two matters that Aristotle's
account of the virtues seemed most vulnerable; hence if it turns out to be
the case that this socially teleological account can support Aristotle's gen-
eral account of the virtues as well as does his own biologically teleological
account, these differences from Aristotle himself may well be regarded as
strengthening rather than weakening the case for a generally Aristotelian
standpoint.
     There are at least three ways in which the account that I have given
is clearly Aristotelian . First it requires for its completion a cogent elabora-
tion of just those distinctions and concepts which Aristotle's account re-
quires: voluntariness, the distinction between the intellectual virtues and
the virtues of character, the relationship of both to natural abilities and to
the passions and the structure of practical reasoning. On everyone of these
topics something very like Aristotle's view has to be defended, if my own
account is to be plausible.
      Secondly my account can accommodate an Aristotelian view of pleas-
 ure and enjoyment, whereas it is interestingly irreconcilable with any utili-
 tarian view and more particularly with Franklin's account of the virtues .
 We can approach these questions by considering how to reply to some-
 one who, having considered my account of the differences between goods
 internal to and goods external to a practice enquired into which class. if
 either, does pleasure or enjoyment fall? The answer is, 'Some types of
 pleasure into one, some into the other.'
      Someone who achieves excellence in a practice, who plays chess or foot-
 ball well or who carries through an enquiry in physics or an experimental
 mode in painting with success, characteristically enjoys his achievement
 and his activity in achieving. So does someone who, although not breaking
 the limit of achievement. plays or thinks or acts in a way that leads towards
 such a breaking of limit. As Aristotle says, the enjoyment of the activity
 and the enjoyment of achievement are not the ends at which the agent
 aims, but the enjoyment supervenes upon the successful activity in such
 a way that the activity achieved and the activity enjoyed are one and the
 same state. Hence to aim at the one is to aim at the other; and hence also
  it is easy to confuse the pursuit of excellence with the pursuit of enjoyment
  in this specific sense. This particular confusion is harmless enough; what is
  not harmless is the confusion of enjoyment in this specifIC sense with other
  forms of pleasure.
      For certain kinds of pleasure are of course external goods along with
  prestige, status, power and money. Not all pleasure is the enjoyment super-
198                               After Virtue

ventng upon achieved activity; some is the pleasure of psychological or
physical states independent of all activity . Such states- for example that
produced on a normal palate by the closely successive and thereby blended
sensations of Colchester oyster, cayenne pepper and Veuve Cliguot-may
be sought as external goods, as external rewards which may be purchased
by money o r received in vinue of prestige . Hence the pleasures are
categorized neatly and appropriately by the classification into internal and
external goods.
    It is just this classification which can find no place within Franklin's ac-
count of the vinues which is framed entirely in terms of external relation-
ships and external goods. Thus although by this stage of the argument it
is possible to claim that my account does capture a conception of the vir-
tues which is at the core o f the panicular ancient and medieval tradition
which I have delineated , it is egually clear that there is more than one
possible conception of the vinues and that Franklin's standpoint and in-
deed any utilitarian standpoint is such that to accept it will entail rejecting
the tradition and vice versa.
    One crucial point of incompatibility was noted long ago by D .H.
Lawrence. When Franklin assens, 'Rarely use venery but for health or off-
spring. . ', Lawrence replies, 'Never use venery .' It is of the character of
a vinue that in order that it be effective in producing the internal goods
which are the rewards of the vinues it should be exercised without regard
to conseguences . For it turns out to be the case that-and this is in pan
at least one more empirical factual claim - although the vinues are just
those gualities which tend to lead to the achievement of a cenain class of
goods, nonetheless unless we practice them irrespective of whether in any
 panicular set of contingent circumstances they will produce those goods
or not , we cannot possess them at all. We cannot be genuinely courageous
 or truthful and be so only on occasion . Moreover, as we have seen, cultiva-
 tion of the vinues always may and often does hinder the achievement of
 those external goods which are the mark of worldly success. The road to
 success in Philadelphia and the road to heaven may not coincide after all.
     Funhermore we are now able to specify one crucial difficulty for any
 version of utilitarianism - in addition to those which I noticed earlier. Utili-
 tarianism cannot accommodate the distinction between goods internal to
 and goods external to a practice . Not only is that distinction marked by
 none of the cla~sical utilitarians - it cannot be found in Bentham's writings
 nor in those of either of the Mills or of Sidgwick-but internal goods and
 external goods are not commensurable with each other. Hence the notion
 of summing goods - and a fortiori in the light of what I have said about
  kinds of pleasure and enjoyment the notion of summing happiness- in
                           Tbe Nature of tbe Virtues                        199

terms of one single formula or conception of utility , whether it is Franklin's
or Bentham's or Mill's, makes no sense. Nonetheless we ought to note thac
although this distinction is alien to j.S . Mill's thought, it is plausible and
in no way patronizing to suppose that something like this is the distinction
which he was trying to make in Utilitarianism when he distinguished be-
tween 'higher' and 'lower' pleasures. At the most we can say 'something like
this'; for j.S. Mill's upbringing had given him a limited view of human life
and powers, had unfitted him, for example, for appreciating games Just
because of the way it had fitted him for appreciating philosophy . Nonethe-
less the notion that the pursuit of excellence in a way that extends human
powers is at the heart of human life is instantly recognizable as at home
in not only J.S. Mill's political and social thought, but also in his and Mrs .
Taylor's life. Were I to choose human exemplars of certain of the virtues
as I understand them, there would of course be many names to name ,
those of St. Benedict and St . Francis of Assisi and St. Theresa and those
of Frederick Engels and Eleanor Marx and Leon Trotsky among them . But
 that of John Stuart Mill would have to be there as certainly as any other.
     Thirdly my account is Aristotelian in that it links evaluation and ex-
 planation in a characteristically Aristotelian way . From an Aristotelian
 standpoint to identify certain actions as manifesting or failing to manifest
 a virtue or virtues is never only to evaluate; it is also to take the first step
 towards explaining why those actions rather than some others were per-
 formed. Hence for an Aristotelian quite as much as for a Platonist the fate
 of a city or an individual can be explained by citing the injustice of a tyrant
 or the courage of its defenders . Indeed without allusion to the place that
  justice and injustice, courage and cowardice play in human life very little
 will be genuinely explicable. It follows that many of the explanatory pro-
  jects of the modern social sciences, a methodological canon of which is the
  separation of 'the facts' -this conception of the 'the facts' is the one which
  I delineated in Chapter 7 -from all evaluation, are bound to fail. For the
  fact that someone was or failed to be courageous or just cannot be recog-
  nized as 'a fact' by those who accept that methodological canon. The ac-
  count of the virtues which I have given is completely at one with Aris-
  totle's on this point. But now the question may be raised: your account
  may be in many respects Aristotelian, but is it not in some respects false?
  Consider the following important objection.
      I have defined the virtues partly in terms of their place in practices. But
  surely. it may be suggested. some practices-that is, some coherent human
   activities which answer to the description of what I have called a practice-
   are evil. So in discussions by some moral philosophers of this type of ac-
   count of the virtues it has been suggested that torture and sado-masochistic
200                              Ajier Virtue

sexual activities might be examples of practices. But how can a disposition
be a virtue if it is the kind of disposition which sustains practices and some
practices issue in evil? My answer to this objection falls into two parts.
    First I want to allow that there may be practices-in the sense in which
I understand the concept-which simply are evil. I am far from convinced
that there are, and I do not in fact believe that either torture or sado-
masochistic sexuality answer to the description of a practice which my ac-
count of the virtues employs. But I do not want to fC!st my case on this
lack of conviction, especially since it is plain that as a matter of contingent
fact many types of practice may on particular occasions be productive of
evil. For the range of practices includes the arts, the sciences and certain
types of intellectual and athletic game . And it is at once obvious that any
of these may under certain conditions be a source of evil: the desire to ex-
cel and to win can corrupt, a man may be so engrossed by his painting
that he neglects his family, what was initially an honorable resort to war
can issue in savage cruelty , But what follows from this?
     It certainly is not the case that my account entails either that we ought
 to excuse or condone such evils or that whatever flows from a virtue is
 right. I do have to allow that courage sometimes sustains injustice, that
 loyalty has been known to strengthen a murderous aggressor and that gen-
 erosity has sometimes weakened the capacity to do good. But to deny this
 would be to fly in the face of just those empirical facts which I invoked
 in criticizing Aquinas' account of the unity of the virtues. That the virtues
 need initially to be defined and explained with reference to the notion of
 a practice thus in no way entails approval of all practices in all circum-
 stances , That the virtues-as the objection itself presupposed-are defmed
 not in terms of good and right practices, but of practices, does not entail
 or imply that practices as actually carried through at particular times and
 places do not stand in need of moral criticism . And the resources for such
 criticism are not lacking. There is in the first place no inconsistency in ap-
 pealing to the requirements of a virtue to criticize a practice. Justice may
 be initially defined as a disposition which in its particular way is necessary
 to sustain practices; it does not follow that in pursuing the requirements
 of a practice violations of justice are not to be condemned. Moreover I
 already pointed out in Chapter 12 that a morality of virtues requires as
 its counterpart a conception of moral law . Its requirements too have to be
 met by practices, But, it may be asked, does not all this imply that more
 needs to be said about the place of practices in some larger moral context?
 Does not this at least suggest that there is more to the core concept of a
 virtue than can be spelled out in terms of practices? I have after all em-
  phasized that the scope of any virtue in human life extends beyond the
                            The Nature of the Virtues                       201

practices in terms of which it is initially defined . What then is the place
of the virtues in the larger arenas of human life?
     I stressed earlier that any account of the virtues in terms of practices
could only be a partial and first account. What is required to complement
it? The most notable difference so far between my account and any ac-
count that could be called Aristotelian is that although I have in no way
restricted the exercise of the virtues to the context of practices, it is in
terms of practices that I have located their point and function. Whereas
Aristode locates that point and function in terms of the notion of a type
of whole human life which can be called good. And it does seem that the
question 'What would a human being lack who lacked the virtues?' must
be given a kind of answer which goes beyond anything which I have said
so far . For such an individual would not merely fail in a variety ofparticular
ways in respect of the kind of excellence which can be achieved through
 participation in practices and in respect of the kind of human relationship
 required to sustain such excellence. His own life viewed as a whole would
 perhaps be defective; it would not be the kind of life which someone
 would describe in trying to answer the question 'What is the best kind of
 life for this kind of man or woman to live?' And that question cannot be
 answered without at least raising Aristotle's own question, 'What is the
 good life for man?' Consider three ways in which human life informed only
 by the conception of the virtues sketched so far would be defective .
      It would be pervaded, first of all, by too many conflicts and too much
 arbitrariness. I argued earlier that it is a merit of an account of the virtues
 in terms of a multiplicity of goods that it allows for the possibility of tragic
 conflict in a way in which Aristode's does not. But it may also produce
 even in the life of someone who is virtuous and disciplined too many occa-
 sions when one allegiance points in one direction, another in another. The
  claims of one practice may be incompatible with another in such a way
  that one may find oneself oscillating in an arbitrary way, rather than mak-
  ing rational choices. So it seems to have been with T.E. Lawrence. Com-
  mitment to sustaining the kind of community in which the virtues can
  flourish may be incompatible with the devotion which a particular practice
   -of the arts, for example- requires. So there may be tensions between the
  claims of family life and those of the arts - the problem that Gauguin
   solved or failed to solve by fleeing to Polynesia, or between the claims of
   politics and those of the arts - the problem that Lenin solved or failed to
   solve by refusing to listen to Beethoven .
       If the life of the virtues is continuously fractured by choices in which
   one allegiance entails the apparently arbitrary renunciation of another, it
   may seem that the goods internal to practices do after all derive their
202                              Ajier Virtue

authority from our individual choices; for when differmt goods summon
in different and in incompatible directions, 'I' have to choose between their
rival claims. The modern self with its criterionless choices apparently reap-
pears in the alien context of what was claimed to be an Aristotelian world.
This accusation might be rebutted in part by returning to the question of
why both goods and virtues do have authority in our lives and repeating
what was said earlier in this chapter. But this reply would only be partly
successful; the distinctively modern notion of choice would indeed have
reappeared, even if with a more limited scope for its t:xerClse than it has
usually claimed.                                 .
     Secondly without an overriding conception of the telos of a whole
human life, conceived as a unity, our conception of certain individual vir-
tues has to remain partial and incomplete. Consider two examples. Justice,
on an Aristotelian view, is defined in terms of giving each person his or
 her due or desert. To deserve well is to have contributed in some substan-
 tial way to the achievement of those goods, the sharing of which and the
 common pursuit of which provide foundations for human community.
 But the goods internal to practices, including the goods internal to the
 practice of making and sustaining forms of community, need to be ordered
 and evaluated in some way if we are to assess relative desert. Thus any
 substantive application of an Aristotelian concept of justice requires an
 understanding of goods and of the good that goes beyond the multiplicity
 of goods which inform practices. As with justice, so also with patience. Pa-
 tience is the virtue of waiting attentively without complaint, but not of
 waiting thus for anything at aiL To treat patience as a virtue presupposes
 some adequate answer to the question: waiting for what? Within the con-
 text of practices a partial, although for many purposes adequate, answer
 can be given: the patience of a craftsman with refractory material, of a
 teacher with a slow pupil, of a politician in negotiations, are all species of
  patience. But what if the material is just too refractory, the pupil too slow,
 the negotiations too frustrating? Ought we always at a certain point just
 to give up in the interests of the practice itself? The medieval exponents
 of the virtue of patience claimed that there are certain types of situation
 in which the virtue of patience requires that I do not ever give up on some
 person or task, situations in which, as they would have put it, I am re-
 quired to embody in my attitude to that person or task something of the
 patient attitude of God towards his creation. But this could only be so if
 patience served some overriding good, some telos which warranted putting
other goods in a subordinate place. Thus it turns out that the content of
the virtue of patience depends upon how we order various goods in a
                            The Nature of tbe Virtues                       203

hierarchy and a fortiori on whether we are able rationally so to order these
particular goods.
    I have suggested so far that unless there is a telos which transcends the
limited goods of practices by constituting the good of a whole human life,
the good of a human life conceived as a unity, it will both be the case that
a certain subversive arbitrariness will invade the moral life and that we shall
be unable to specify the context of certain virtues adequately. These two
considerations are reinforced by a third : that there is at least one virtue
recognized by the tradition which cannot be specified at all except with
reference to the wholeness of a human life-the virtue of integrity or con-
stancy . 'Purity of heart,' said Kierkegaard, 'is to will one thing.' This notion
of singleness of purpose in a whole life can have no application unless that
of a whole life does .
    It is dear therefore that my preliminary account of the virtues in terms
of practices captures much, but very far from all, of what the Aristotelian
 tradition taught about the virtues. It is also clear that to gi'/e an account
 that is at once more fully adequate to the tradition and rationally defen-
 sible, it is necessary to raise a question to which the Aristotelian tradition
 presupposed an answer, an answer so widely shared in the pre-modern
 world that it never had to be formulated explicitly in any detailed way.
 This question is: is it rationally justifiable to conceive of each human life
 as a unity, so that we may try to specify each such life as having its good
 and so that we may understand the virtues as having their function in
 enabling an individual to make of his or her life one kind of unity rather
 than another?
