                                   15
         The Vinues, the Unity of a Human Life
             and the Concept of a Tradition


  Any contemporary attempt to envisage each human life as a whole, as a
  unity, whose character provides the virtues with an adequate telos en-
  counters two different kinds of obstacle, one social and one philosophical.
  The social obstacles derive from the way in which modernity partitions
  each human life into a variety of segments, each with its own norms and
  modes of behavior. So work is divided from leisure, private life from
  public, the corporate from the personal. So both childhood and old age
  have been wrenched away from the rest of human life and made over into
  distinct realms. And all these separations have been achieved so that it is
  the distinctiveness of each and not the unity of the life of the individual
  who passes through those parts in terms of which we are taught to think
  and to feel.
      The philosophical obstacles derive from two distinct tendencies, one
  chiefly, though not only, domesticated in analytical philosophy and one
  at home in both sociological theory and in existentialism. The former is
   the tendency to think atomistically about human action and to analyze
  complex actions and transactions in terms of simple components. Hence
  the recurrence in more than one context of the notion of 'a basic action' . .
  That particular actions derive their character as parts of larger wholes is
  a point of view alien to our dominant ways of thinking and yet one which
  it is necessary at least to consider if we are to begin to understand how
  a life may be more than a sequence of individual actions and episodes.
     Equ~ly the unity .of a human life becomes invisible to us when a sharp
 separation IS made either between the individual and the roles that he or
she plays - a separation characteristic not only of Sartre's existentialism,
but also of the sociological theory of Ralf Dahrendorf-or between the dif-
ferent role-and quasi-role-enactments of an individual life so that life
co~es to appear as nothing but a series of unconnected episodes-a liqui-
dation of the self characteristic, as I noticed earlier, of Goffman's socio-
logical theory. I already also suggested in Chapter 3 that both the Sanrian
and the Goffmanesque conceptions of selthood are highly characteristic of
                Virtues, Unity of Lift and Concept of a Tradition           205

the modes of thought and practice of modernity. It is perhaps therefore
unsurprising to realize that the self as thus conceived cannot be envisaged
as a bearer of the Aristotelian vinues.
    For a self separated from its roles in the Sanrian mode loses that arena
of social relationships in which the Aristotelian vinues function if they
function at all. The patterns of a vinuous life would fall under those con-
demnations of conventionality which Sanre put into the mouth of An-
toine Roquentin in LA Nawee and which he uttered in his own person in
LErre et le neant. Indeed the selfs refusal of the inauthenticity of conven-
tionalized social relationships becomes what integrity is diminished into in
Sanre's account.
     At the same time the liquidation of the self into a set of demarcated
areas of role-playing allows no scope for the exercise of dispositions which
could genuinely be accounted vinues in any sense remotely Aristotelian.
 For a vinue is not a disposition that makes for success only in some one
 panicular type of situation. What are spoken of as the vinues of a good
 committee man or of a good administrator or of a gambler or a pool
 hustler are professional skills professionally deployed in those situations
 where they can be effective, not vinues. Someone who genuinely possesses
 a vinue can be expected to manifest it in very different types of situation,
 many of them situations where the practice of a vinue cannot be expected
 to be effective in the way that we expect a professional skill to be . Hector
 exhibited one and the same courage in his paning from Andromache and
 on the battlefield with Achilles; Eleanor Marx exhibited one and the same
 compassion in her relationship with her father, in her work with trade
 unionists and in her entanglement with A veling. And the unity of a vinue
 in someone's life is intelligible only as a characteristic of a unitary life, a
 life that can be conceived and evaluated as a whole. Hence just as in the
 discussion of the changes in and fragmentation of morality which accom-
 panied the rise of modernity in the earlier pans of this book, each stage
 in the emergence of the characteristically modem views of the moral judg-
 ment was accompanied by a corresponding stage in the emergence of the
 characteristically modem conceptions of selfhood; so now, in defining the
 panicular pre-modern concept of the vinues with which I have been preoc-
 cupied, it has become necessary to say something of the concomitant con-
  cept of selfhood, a concept of a self whose unity resides in the unity of
  a narrative which links binh to life to death as narrative beginning to mid-
  dle to end.
      Such a conception of the self is perhaps less unfamiliar than it may ap-
   pear at first sight. Just because it has played a key pan in the cultures which
   are historically predecessors of our own, it would not be surprising if it
206                               After Virtue

turned out to be still an unacknowledged presence in many of our ways
of thinking and acting. Hence it is not inappropriate to begin by scrutiniz-
ing some of our most taken-for-granted, but clearly correct conceptual in-
sights about human actions and selfhood in order to show how natural it
is to think of the self in a narrative mode.
    It is a conceptual commonplace, both for philosophers and for ordinary
agents, that one and the same segment of human behavior may be cor-
rectly characterized in a number of different ways. To the question 'What
is he .doing?' the answers may with equal truth and appropriateness be 'Dig-
ging', 'Gardening' , 'Taking exercise', 'Preparing for winter' or 'Pleasing his
wife'. Some of these answers will characterize the agent's intentions, other
 unintended consequences of his actions, and of these unintended conse-
quences some may be such that the agent is aware of them and others not.
What is important to notice immediately is that any answer to the ques-
tions of how we are to understand or to explain a given segment of be-
 havior will presuppose some prior answer to the question of how these
different correct answers to the question 'What is he doing?' are related to
 each other. For if someone's primary intention is to put the garden in order
 before the winter and it is only incidentally the case that in so doing he
 is taking exercise and pleasing his wife, we have one type of behavior to
 be explained; but if the agent's primary intention is to please his wife by
 taking exercise, we have quite another type of behavior to be explained
 and we will have to look in a different direction for understanding and
 explanation.                                                  .
     In the first place the episode has been situated in an annual cycle of
 domestic activity, and the behavior embodies an intention which presup-
 poses a particular type of household-cum-garden setting with the peculiar
 narrative history of that setting in which this segment of behavior now
 becomes an episode. In the second instance the episode has been situated
 in the narrative history of a marriage, a very different, even if related,
 social setting. We cannot, that is to say, characterize behavior indepen-
  dently of intentions, and we cannot characterize intentions independently
 of the settings which make those intentions intelligible both to agents
  themselves and to others.
     I use the word 'setting' here as a relatively inclusive term. A social setting
  may be an institution, it may be what I have called a practice, or it may
  be a milieu of some other human kind. But it is central to the notion of
  a setting as I am going to understand it that a setting has a history, a history
  within which the histories of individual agents not only are, but have to
  be, situated, just because without the setting and its changes through time
  the history of the individual agent and his changes through time will be
                Virtues. Unity of Lift and Concept of a Tradition         207

unintelligible. Of course one and the same piece of behavior may belong
to more than one setting. There are at least two different ways in which
this may be so .
     In my earlier example the agent's activity may be pan of the history
both of the cycle of household activity and of his marriage . .two histories
which have happened to intersect. The household may have its own his-
tory stretching back through hundreds of years, as do the histories of some
European farms, where the farm has had a life of its own. even though
different families have in different periods inhabited it; and the marriage
will cenainly have its own history, a history which itself presupposes that
a panicular point has been reached in the history of the institution of mar-
 riage. If we are to relate some panicular segment of behavior in any precise
 way to an agent's intentions and thus to the settings which that agent in-
 habits, we shall have to understand in a precise way how the variety of
 correct characterizations of the agent's behavior relate to each other first
 by identifying which characteristics refer us to an intention and which do
 not and then by classifying funher the items in both categories.
      Where intentions are concerned, we need to know which intention or
 intentions were primary, that is to say, of which it is the case that, had
 the agent intended otherwise, he would not have performed that action .
 Thus if we know that a man is gardening with the self-avowed purposes
 of healthful exercise and of pleasing his wife, we do not yet know how
  to understand what he is doing until we know the answer to such ques-
  tions as whether he would continue gardening if he continued to believe
  that gardening was healthful exercise, but discovered that his gardening no
  longer pleased his wife, and whether he would continue gardening, if he
  ceased to believe that gardening was healthful exercise. but continued to
  believe that it pleased his wife. and whether he would continue gardening
   if he changed his beliefs on both points. That is to say. we need to know
   both what cenain of his beliefs are and which of them are causally effec-
   tive; and, that is to say, we need to know whether cenain contrary-to-fact
   hypothetical statements are true or false. And until we know this , we shall
    not know how to characterize correcdy what the agent is doing.
       Consider another equally trivial example of a set of compatibly correct
    answers to the question 'What is he doing?' 'W riting a sentence'; 'Finishing
    his book'; 'Contributing to the debate on the theory of action'; 'Trying to
    get tenure'. Here the intentions can be ordered in terms of the stretch of
    time to which reference is made. Each of the shoner-term intentions is.
    and can only be made, intelligible by reference to some longer-term inten-
    tions; and the characterization of the behavior in terms of the longer-term
    intentions can only be correct if some of the characterizations in terms of
208                              After Virtue

shorter-term intentions are also correct. Hence the behavior is only char-
acterized adequately when we know what the longer and longest-term in-
tentions invoked are and how the shorter-term intentions are related to the
longer. Once again we are involved in writing a narrative history.
    Intentions thus need to be ordered both causally and temporally and
both orderings will make references to settings, references already made
obliquely by such elementary terms as 'gardening, 'wife', 'book', and
'tenure'. Moreover the correct identification of the agent's beliefs will be
an essential constituent of this task; failure at this point would mean failure
in the whole enterprise. (The conclusion may seem obvious; but it already
entails one important consequence. There is no such thing as 'behavior',
to be identified prior to and independently of intentions, beliefs and set-
tings. Hence the project of a science of behavior takes on a mysterious and
somewhat outre character. It is not that such a science is impossible; but
there is nothing for it to be but a science of uninterpreted physical move-
 ment such as B.F. Skinner aspires to. It is no part of my task here to ex-
 amine Skinner's problems; but it is worth noticing that it is not at all clear
 what a scientific experiment could be, if one were a Skinnerian; since the
 conception of an experiment is certainly one of intention- and belief-
 informed behavior. And what would be utterly doomed to failure would
 be the project of a science of, say, political behavior, detached from a study
 of intentions, beliefs and settings. It is perhaps worth noting that when the
 expression 'the behavioral sciences' was given its first influential use in a
 Ford Foundation Report of 1953, the term 'behavior' was defined so as
 to include what were called 'such subjective behavior as attitudes, beliefs,
 expectations. motivations and aspirations' as well as 'overt acts'. But what
 the Report's wording seems to imply is that it is cataloguing two distinct
 sets of items, available for independent study. If the argument so far is cor-
 rect, then there is only one set of items.)
     Consider what the argument so far implies about the interrelationships
 of the intentional, the social and the historical. We identify a particular
 action only by invoking two kinds of context, implicitly if not explicitly.
 We place the agent's intentions, I have suggested. in causal and temporal
 order with reference to their role in his or her history; and we also place
 them with reference to their role in the history of the setting or settings
 to which they belong. In doing this, in determining what causal efficacy
 the agent's intentions had in one or more directions, and how his short-
 term intentions succeeded or failed to be constitutive of long-term inten-
 tions, we ourselves write a further part of these histories. Narrative history
 of a certain kind turns out to be the basic and essential genre for the
  characterization of human actions.
                Virtues, Unity of Lift and Concept of a Tradition          209

     It is imponant to be clear now different the standpoint presupposed by
the argument so far is from that of those analytical philosophers who have
constructed accounts of human actions which make central the notion of
'a' human action. A course of human events is then seen as a complex se-
quence of individual actions, and a natural question is: How do we indi-
viduate human actions? Now there are contexts in which such notions are
at home. In the recipes of a cookery book for instance actions are indi-
 viduated in just the way that some analytical philosophers have supposed
 to be possible of all actions. 'Take six eggs. Then break them into a bowl.
 Add flour, salt, sugar, etc.' But the point about such sequences is that each
 element in them is intelligible as an action only as a-possible-e1ement-in-a-
 sequence. Moreover even such a sequence requires a context to be intelligi-
 ble. If in the middle of my lecture on Kant's ethics I suddenly broke six eggs
 into a bowl and added flour and sugar, proceeding all the while with my
 Kantian exegesis, I have not, simply in vinue of the fact that I was follow-
 ing a sequence prescribed by Fanny Farmer, performed an intelligible action.
      To this it might be retoned that I cenainly performed an action or a
 set of actions, if not an intelligible action . But to this I want to reply that
 the concept of an intelligible action is a more fundamental concept than
 that of an action as such. Unintelligible actions are failed candidates for the
 status of intelligible action; and to lump unintelligible actions and intelligi-
  ble actions together in a single class of actions and then to characterize ac-
  tion in terms of what items of both sets have in common is to make the
  mistake of ignoring this. It is also to neglect the central imponance of the
  concept of intelligibility.
      The imponance of the concept of intelligibility is closely related to the
  fact that the most basic distinction of all embedded in our discourse and
  our practice in this area is that between human beings and other beings.
  Human beings can be held to account for that of which they are the
  authors; other beings cannot. To identify an occurrence as an action is in
  the paradigmatic instances to identify it under a type of description which
  enables us to see that occurrence as flowing intelligibly from a human
  agent's intentions, motives, passions and purposes. It is therefore to under-
  stand an action as something for which someone is accountable, about
  which it is always appropriate to ask the agent for an intelligible account .
   When an occurrence is apparently the intended action of a human agent,
   but nonetheless we cannot so identify it, we are both intellectually and
   practically baffled. We do not know how to respond; we do not know
   how to explain; we do not even know how to characterize minimally as
   an intelligible action; our distinction between the humanly accountable
   and the merely natural seems to have broken down. And this kind of baf-
210                               After Virtue

flement does indeed occur in a number of different kinds of situation;
when we enter alien cultures or even alien social structures within our own
culture, in our encounters with cenain types of neurotic or psychotic pa-
tient (it is indeed the unintelligibility of such patients' actions that leads to
their being treated as patients; actions unintelligible to the agent as well as
to everyone else are understood-rightly-as a kind of suffering), but also
in everyday situations. Consider an example.
     I am standing waiting for a bus and the young man standing next to
me suddenly says: The name of the common wild duck is Histrionicus
histrionicus histrionicus.' There is no problem as to the meaning of the
sentence he uttered: the problem is, how to answer the question, what was
he doing in uttering it? Suppose he just uttered such sentences at random
intervals; this would be one possible form of madness. We would render
his action of utterance intelligible if one of the following turned out to be
true. He has mistaken me for someone who yesterday had approached him
 in the library and asked: 'Do you by any chance know the Latin name of
the common wild duck?' Or he has just come from a session with his
 psychotherapist who has urged him to break down his shyness by talking
 to strangers. 'But what shall I say?' 'Oh, anything at all.' Or he is a Soviet
 spy waiting at a prearranged rendez-vous and uttering the ill-chosen code
 sentence which will identify him to his contact. In each case the act of ut-
 terance become intelligible by finding its place in a narrative.
     To this it may be replied that the supplying of a narrative is not
 necessary to make such an act intelligible. All that is required is that we
 can identify the relevant type of speech act (e.g. 'He was answering a ques-
 tion) or some purpose served by his utterance (e.g. 'He was trying to at-
 tract your attention). But speech acts and purposes too can be intelligible
 or unintelligible. Suppose that the man at the bus stop explains his act of
  utterance by saying 'I was answering a question.' I reply: 'But I never asked
  you any question to which that could have been the answer.' He says, 'Oh,
  I know that.' Once again his action becomes unintelligible. And a parallel
  example could easily be constructed to show that the mere fact that an ac-
  tion serves some purposes of a recognized type is not sufficient to render
  an action intelligible. Both purposes and speech-acts require contexts.
      The most familiar type of context in and by reference to which speech-
 acts and purposes are rendered intelligible is the conversation. Conversa-
 tion is so all-pervasive a feature of the human world that it tends to escape
 philosophical attention. Yet remove conversation from human life and
 what would be left? Consider then what is involved in following a conver-
 sation and finding it intelligible or unintelligible. (To tind a conversation
 intelligible is not the same as to understand it; for a conversation which
                Virtues, Unity of Life and Concept of a Tradition            211

I overhear may be intelligible, but I may fail to understand it.} If I listen
to a conversation between two other people my ability to grasp the thread
of the conversation will involve an ability to bring it under some one out
of a set of descriptions in which the degree and kind of coherence in the
conversation is brought out: 'a drunken, rambling quarrel', 'a serious in-
tellectual disagreement', 'a tragic misunderstanding of each other', 'a comic,
even farcial miscontrual of each other's motives', 'a penetrating interchange
of views', 'a struggle to dominate each other', 'a trivial exchange of gossip .'
     The use of words such as 'tragic', 'comic', and 'farcial' is not marginal
to such evaluations. We allocate conversations to genres, just as we do
literary narratives. Indeed a conversation is a dramatic work, even if a very
short one, in which the participants are not only the actors, but also the
joint authors, working out in agreement or disagreement the mode of their
production . For it is not just that conversations belong to genres in just
the way that plays and novels do; but they have beginnings, middles and
endings just as do literary works. They embody reversals and recognitions;
they move towards and away from climaxes. There may within a longer
 conversation be digressions and subplots, indeed digressions within digres-
 sions and subplots within subplots.
     But if this is true of conversations, it is true also mutatis mutandis of bat-
 tles, chess games, courtships, philosophy seminars, families at the dinner
 table, businessmen negotiating contracts- that is, of human transactions in
 general. For conversation, understood widely enough, is the form of
 human transactions in general . Conversational behavior is not a special son
 or aspect of human behavior, even though the forms of language-using and
 of human life are such that the deeds of others speak for them as much
 as do their words. For that is possible only because they are the deeds of
 those who have words.
     I am presenting both conversations in panicular then and human ac-
 tions in general as enacted narratives. Narrative is not the work of poets,
 dramatists and novelists reflecting upon events which had no narrative
 order before one was imposed by the singer or the writer; narrative form
  is neither disguise nor decoration. Barbara Hardy has written that 'we
  dream in narrative, day-dream in narrative, remember, anticipate, hope,
  despair, believe, doubt, plan, revise, criticize, construct, gossip, learn , hate
  and love by narrative' in arguing the same point (Hardy 1968, p. 5).
     At the beginning of this chapter I argued that in successfully identifying
  and understanding what someone else is doing we always move towards
  placing a panicular episode in the context of a set of narrative histories,
  histories both of the individuals concerned and of the settings in which
  they act and suffer. It is now becoming clear that we render the actions
212                              After Virtue

of others intelligible in this way because action itself has a basically his-
torical character. It is because we all live out narratives in our lives and
because we understand our own lives in terms of the narratives that we
live out that the form of narrative is appropriate for understanding the ac-
tions of others. Stories are lived before they are told-except in the case
of fiction.
    This has of course been denied in recent debates. Louis O. Mink, quar-
relling with Barbara Hardy'S view, has asserted: 'Stories are not lived but
told. Life has no beginnings, middles, or ends; there are meetings, but the
start of an affair belongs to the story we tell ourselves later, and there are
partings, but final partings only in the story. There are hopes, plans, battles
and ideas, but only in retrospective stories are hopes unfulfilled, plans
miscarried, battles decisive, and ideas seminal. Only in the story is it
America which Columbus discovers and only in the story is the kingdom
lost for want of a nail' (Mink 1970, pp. 557-8).
    What are we to say to this? Certainly we must agree that it is only
 retrospectively that hopes can be characterized as unfulfilled or battles as
 decisive and so on. But we so characterize them in life as much as in art.
 And to someone who says that in life there are no endings, or that final
 partings take place only in stories, one is tempted to reply, 'But have you
 never heard of death?' Homer did not have to tell the tale of Hector before
 Andromache could lament unfulfilled hope and final parting. There are
 countless Hectors and countless Andromaches whose lives embodied the
 form of their Homeric namesakes, but who never came to the attention
 of any poet. What is true is that in taking an event as a beginning or an
 ending we bestow a significance upon it which may be debatable. Did the
 Roman republic end with die death ofJulius Caesar, or at Philippi, or with
 the founding of the principate? The answer is surely that, like Charles 11,
 it was a long time a-dying; but this answer implies the reality of its ending
 as much as do any of the former. There is a crucial sense in which the prin-
 cipate of Augustus, or the taking of the oath in the tennis court, or the
 decision to construct an atomic bomb at Los Alamos constitute beginnings;
 the peace of 404 B.C., the abolition of the Scottish Parliament and the
 battle of Waterloo equally constitute endings; while there are many events
which are both endings and beginnings.
    As with beginnings, middles and endings, so also with genres and with
the phenomenon of embedding. Consider the question of to what genre
the life of Thomas Becket belongs, a question which has to be asked and
answered before we can decide how it is to be written. (On Mink's
paradoxical view this question could not be asked until after the life had
been written.) In some of the medieval versions, Thomas's career is
                Virtues. Unity of Life and Concept of a Tradition       213

presented in terms of the canons of medieval hagiography. In the Icelandic
Thomas Saga he is presented as a saga hero. In Dom David Knowles's
modem biography the story is a tragedy. the tragic relationship of Thomas
and Henry H, each of whom satisfies Aristotle's demand that the hero be
a great man with a fatal flaw. Now it dearly makes sense to ask who is
right, if anyone: the monk William of Canterbury. the author of the saga.
or the Cambridge Regius Professor Emeritus? The answer appears to be
dearly the last . The true genre of the life is neither hagiography nor saga,
but tragedy. So of such modem narrative subjects as the life of T rotsky
or that of Lenin, of the history of the Soviet Communist Party or the
American presidency, we may also ask: To what genre does their history
belong? And this is the same question as: What type of account of their
history will be both true and intelligible?
    Or consider again how one narrative may be embedded in another. In
both plays and novels there are well-known examples: the play within the
play in Hamlet, Wandering Willie's Tale in Redgauntlet, Aeneas' narrative
to Dido in book 2 of the Aeneid, and so on . But there are equally weU-
known examples in real life. Consider again the way in which the career
of Becket as archbishop and chancellor is embedded within the reign of
Henry n, or the way in which the tragic life of Mary Stuart is embedded
in that of Elizabeth I, or the history of the Confederacy within the history
of the United States. Someone may discover (or not discover) that he or
she is a character in a number of narratives at the same time, some of them
embedded in others. Or again, what seemed to be an intelligible narrative
 in which one was playing a part may be transformed wholly or partly into
 a story of unintelligible episodes. This last is what happened to Kafka's
 character K. in both The Trial and The Castle. (It is no accident that Kafka
 could not end his novels, for the notion of an ending like that of a begin-
 ning has its sense only in terms of intelligible narrative.)
     I spoke earlier of the agent as not only an actor, but an author. Now
 I must emphasize that what the agent is able to do and say intelligibly as
 an actor is deeply affected by the fact that we are never more (and some-
 times less) than the co-authors of our own narratives. Only in fantasy do
 we live what story we please. In life, as both Aristotle and Engels noted,
 we are always under certain constraints. We enter upon a stage which we
 did not design and we find ourselves part of an action that was not of our
  making. Each of us being a main character in his own drama plays subor-
  dinate parts in the dramas of others, and each drama constrains the others.
  In my drama, perhaps, I am Hamlet or Iago or at least the swineherd who
  may yet become a prince, but to you I am only A Gentleman or at best
  Second Murderer, while you are my Polonius or my Gravedigger, but
214                              After Virtue

your own hero. Each of our dramas exertS constraints on each other's,
making the whole different from the partS, but still dramatic.
    It is considerations as complex as these which are involved in making
the notion of intelligibility the conceptual connecting link between the no-
tion of action and that of narrative. Once we have understood its impor-
tance the claim that the concept of an action is secondary to that of an
intelligible action will perhaps appear less bizarre and so too will the claim
that the notion of 'an' action, while of the highest practical imponance,
is always a potentially misleading abstraction. An action is a moment in
a possible or actual history or in a number of such histories. The notion
of a history is as fundamental a notion as the notion of an action. Each
requires the other. But I cannot say this without noticing that it is precisely
this that Sanre denies - as indeed his whole theory of the self, which cap-
tures so well the spirit of modernity, requires that he should. In lA Nausie,
Sanre makes Antoine Roquentin argue not just what Mink argues, that
narrative is very different from life. but that to present human life in the
form of a narrative is always to falsify it . There are not and there cannot
be any true stories. Human life is composed of discrete actions which lead
nowhere. which have no order; the story-teller imposes on human events
retrospectively an order which they did not have while they were lived .
Clearly if Sanre/Roquentin is right-I speak of Sanre/Roquentin to
distinguish him from such other well-know characters as Sanre/Heidegger
and Sanre/Marx-my central contention must be mistaken. There is none-
theless an imponant point of agreement between my thesis and that of
Sanre/Roquentin. We agree in identifying the intelligibility of an action
with its place in a narrative sequence. Only Sanre/Rocluentin takes it that
 human actions are as such unintelligible occurrences: it is to a realization
of the metaphysical implications of this that Roquentin is brought in the
course of the novel and the practical effect upon him is to bring to an end
 his own project of writing an historical biography. This project no longer
 makes sense. Either he will write what is true or he will write an intelligible
 history. but the one possibility excludes the other. Is Sanre/Roquentin
 right?
    We can discover what is wrong with Sanre's thesis in either of two
 ways. One is to ask: what would human actions deprived of any falsifying
 narrative order be like? Sanre himself never answers this question; it is
 striking that in order to show that there are no true narratives. he himself
 writes a narrative. albeit a fictional one. But the only picture that I find
 myself able to form of human nature an-sicb. prior to the alleged misinter-
 pretation by narrative. is the kind of dislocated sequence which Dr. John-
 son offers us in his notes of his travels in France: There we waited on the
                Virtues, Unity of Life and Concept of a Tradition          215

ladies-Morville's.-Spain . Country towns all beggars. At Dijon he could
not find the way to Orleans. - Cross roads of France very bad. - Five sol-
diers.- Women .-Soldiers escaped.- The Colonel would not lose five men
for the sake of one woman. - The magistrate cannot seize a soldier but by
the Colonel's permission, etc., etc.' (quoted in Hobsbaum 1973 , p. 32) .
What this suggests is what I take to be true, namely that the characteriza-
tion of actions allegedly prior to any narrative form being imposed upon
them will always turn out to be the presentation of what are plainly the
disjointed parts of some possible narrative.
     We can also approach the question in another way. What I have called
a history is an enacted dramatic narrative in which the characters are also
 the authors. The characters of course never start literally ab initio; they
 plunge in medias res , the beginnings of their story already made for them
 by what and who has gone before. But when Julian Grenfell or Edward
 Thomas went off to France in the 1914 -18 war they no less enacted a
 narrative than did Menelaus or Odysseus when they went off. The differ-
 ence between imaginary characters and real ones is not in the narrative
 form of what they do; it is in the degree of their authorship of that form
 and of their own deeds. Of course just as they do not begin where they
 please, they cannot go on exactly as they please either; each character is
 constrained by the actions of others and by the social settings presupposed
 in his and their actions, a point forcibly made by Marx in the classical, if
 not entirely satisfactory account of human life as enacted dramatic narra-
 tive, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte.
      I call Marx's account less than satisfactory partly because he wishes to
  present the narrative of human social life in a way that will be compatible
  with a view of the life as law-governed and predictable in a particular way.
  But it is crucial that at any given point in an enacted dramatic narrative
  we do not know what will happen next. The kind of un predictability for
  which I argued in Chapter 8 is required by the narrative structure of
  human life, and the empirical generalizations and explorations which social
  scientists discover provide a kind of understanding of human life which is
  perfectly compatible with that structure.
      This unpredictability coexists with a second crucial characteristic of all
  lived narratives, a certain teleological character. We live out our lives, both
  individually and in our relationships with each other, in the light of certain
  conceptions of a possible shared future, a future in which certain possibil-
  ities beckon us forward and others repel us, some seem already foreclosed
  and others perhaps inevitable. There is no present which is not informed
  by some image of some future and an image of the future which always
   presents itself in the form of a teJos-or of a variety of ends or goals-
216                              After Virtue

towards which we are either moving or failing to move in the present. Un-
predictability and teleology therefore coexist as part of our lives; like char-
acters in a fictional narrative we do not know what will happen next, but
nonetheless our lives have a certain form which projects itself towards our
future. Thus the narratives which we live out have both an unpredictable
and a partially teleological character. If the narrative of our individual and
social lives is to continue intelligibly-and either type of narrative may
lapse into unintelligibility - it is always both the case that there are con-
straints on how the story can continue and that within those constraints
 there are indefinitely many ways that it can continue.
     A central thesis then begins to emerge: man is in his actions and prac-
 tice, as well as in his fictions, essentially a story-telling animal. He is not
 essentially, but becomes through his history, a teller of stories that aspire
 to truth. But the key question for men is not about their own authorship;
 I can only answer the question 'What am I to do?' if I can answer the prior
 question 'Of what story or stories do I find myself a part?' We enter human
 society, that is, with one or more imputed characters- roles into which we
 have been drafted - and we have to learn what they are in order to be able
 to understand how others respond to us and how our responses to them
 are apt to be construed. It is through hearing stories about wicked step-
 mothers, lost children, good but misguided kings, wolves that suckle twin
 boys, youngest sons who receive no inheritance but must make their own
 way in the world and eldest sons who waste their inheritance on riotous
 living and go into exile to live with the swine, that children learn or mis-
 learn both what a child and what a parent is, what the cast of characters
 may be in the drama into which they have been born and what the ways
 of the world are. Deprive children of stories and you leave them un-
 scripted, anxious stutterers in their actions as in their words. Hence there
  is no way to give us an understanding of any society, including our own,
  except through the stock of stories which constitute its initial dramatic
  resources. Mythology, in its original sense, is at the heart of things. Vico
  was right and so was Joyce. And so too of course is that moral tradition
  from heroic society to its medieval heirs according to which the telling of
  stories has a key part in educating us into the virtues.
      I suggested earlier that 'an' action is always an episode in a possible
  history: I would now like to make a related suggestion about another con-
  cept, that of personal identity. Derek Parfit and others have recently drawn
  our attention to the contrast between the criteria of strict identity, which
  is an all-or-nothing matter (either the Tichborne claimant is the last
  Tichborne heir or he is not; either all the properties of the last heir belong
  to the claimant or the claimant is not the heir- Leibniz's Law applies) and
                Virtues, Unity of Life and Concept of a Tradition         217

the psychological continuities of personality which are a matter of more
or less. (Am I the same man at fifty as I was at fony in respect of memory,
intellectual powers, critical responses? More or less.) But what is crucial to
human beings as characters in enacted narratives is that, possessing only
the resources of psychological continuity, we have to be able to respond
to the imputation of strict identity. I am forever whatever I have been at
any time for others-and I may at any time be called upon to answer for
it-no matter how changed I may be now. There is no way of founding
my identity-or lack of it-on the psychological continuity or discontinu-
 ity of the self. The self inhabits a character whose unity is given as the
 unity of a character. Once again there is a crucial disagreement with em-
 piricist or analytical philosophers on the one hand and with existentialists
 on the other.
      Empiricists, such as Locke or Hume, tried to give an account of per-
 sonal identity solely in terms of psychological states or events. Analytical
 philosophers, in so many ways their heirs as well as their critics, have
 wrestled with the connection between those states and events and strict
 identity understood in terms of Leibniz's Law. Both have failed to see that
 a background has been omitted, the lack of which makes the problems in-
 soluble. That background is provided by the concept of a story and of that
  kind of unity of character which a story requires. Just as a history is not
  a sequence of actions, but the concept of an action is that of a moment
  in an actual or possible history abstracted for some purpose from that
  history, so the characters in a history are not a collection of persons, but
  the concept of a person is that of a character abstracted from a history.
      What the narrative concept of selfhood requires is thus twofold. On the
  one hand, I am what I may justifiably be taken by others to be in the
  course of living our a story that runs from my binh to my death; I am
  the subject of a history that is my own and no one else's, that has its own
  peculiar meaning. When someone complains-as do some of those who
  attempt or commit suicide-that his or her life is meaningless, he or she
   is often and perhaps characteristically complaining that the narrative of
  their life has become unintelligible to them, that it lacks any poim, any
   movement towards a climax or a telos. Hence the pont of doing anyone
   thing rather than another at crucial junctures in their lives seems to such
   person to have been lost.
       To be the subject of a narrative that runs from one's binh to one's death
   is, I remarked earlier, to be accountable for the actions and experiences
   which compose a narratable life. It is, that is, to be open to being asked
   to give a cenain kind of account of what one did or what happened to
   one or what one witnessed at any earlier point in one's life than the time
218                                After Virtue

at which the question is posed . Of course someone may have forgotten or
suffered brain damage or simply not attended sufficiently at the relevant
time to be able to give the relevant account. But to say of someone under
some one description (The prisoner of the Chateau d'If) that he is the
same person as someone characterized quite differently (The Count of
Monte Cristo') is precisely to say that it makes sense to ask him to give
an intelligible narrative account enabling us to understand how he could
at different times and different places be one and the same person and yet
be so differently characterized. Thus personal identity is just that identity
presupposed by the unity of the character which the unity of a narrative
requires. Without such unity there would not be subjects of whom stories
could be told .
    The other aspect of narrative selfhood is correlative: I am not only ac-
countable, I am one who can always ask others for an account , who can
put others to the question. I am part of their story, as they are part of
 mine. The narrative of anyone life is part of an interlocking set of narra-
tives. Moreover this asking for and giving of accounts itself plays an impor-
 tant part in constituting narratives. Asking you what you did and why,
saying what I did and why, pondering the differences between your ac-
count of what I did and my account of what I did, and vice versa, these
 are essential constituents of all but the very simplest and barest of narra-
 tives. Thus without the accountability of the self those trains of events that
 constitute all but the simplest and barest of narratives could not occur; and
 without that same accountability narratives would lack that continuity re-
 quired to make both them and the actions that constitute them intelligible.
     It is important to notice that I am not arguing that the concepts of nar-
 rative or of intelligibility or of accountability are more fundamental than
 that of personal identity. The concepts of narrative, intelligibility and ac-
 countability presuppose the applicability of the concept of personal iden-
 tity , just as it presupposes their applicability and juSt as indeed each of these
 three presupposes the applicability of the two others. The relationship is
 one of mutual presupposition. It does follow of course that all attempts to
 elucidate the notion of personal identity independently of and in isolation
 from the notions of narrative, intelligibility and accountability are bound
 to fail. As all such attempts have.
     It is now possible to return to the question from which this enquiry into
 the nature of human action and identity started: In what does the unity
 of an individual life consist? The answer is that its unity is the unity of a
  narrative embodied in a single life. To ask 'What is the good for me?' is
  to ask how best I might live out that unity and bring it to completion. To
  ask 'What is the good for man?' is to ask what all answers to the former
                Virtues. Unity of Life and Concept of a Tradition           219

question must have in common. But now it is important to emphasize that
it is the systematic asking of these two questions and the attempt to answer
them in deed as well as in word which provide the moral life with its unity.
The unity of a human life is the unity of a narrative quest . Quests some-
times fail. are frustrated. abandoned or dissipated into distractions; and
human lives may in all these ways also fail . But the only criteria for success
or failure in a human life as a whole are the critieria of success or failure
in a narrated or to-be-narrated quest. A quest for what?
    Two key features of the medieval conception of a quest need to be re-
called . The first is that without some at least partly determinate conception
of the final te/os there could not be any beginning to a quest. Some concep-
tion of the good for man is required. Whence is such a conception to be
drawn? Precisely from those questions which led us to attempt to tran-
scend that limited conception of the virtues which is available in and
through practices. It is in looking for a conception of the good which will
enable us to order other goods. for a conception of the good which will
enable us to extend our understanding of the purpose and content of the
 virtues. for a conception of the good which will enable us to understand
the place of integrity and constancy in life. that we initially define the kind
 of life which is a quest for the good. But secondly it is clear the medieval
 conception of a quest is not at all that of a search for something already
 adequately characterized. as miners search for gold or geologists for oil. It
 is in the course of the quest and only through encountering and coping
 with the various particular harms. dangers. temptations and distractions
 which provide any quest with its episodes and incidents that the goal of
 the quest is finally to be understood. A quest is always an education both
 as to the character of that which is sought and in self-knowledge.
     The virtues therefore are to be understood as those dispositions which
 will not only sustain practices and enable us to achieve the goods internal
 to practices. but which will also sustain us in the relevant kind of quest
 for the good. by enabling us to overcome the harms. dangers. temptations
 and distractions which we encounter. and which will furnish us with in-
 creasing self-knowledge and increasing knowledge of the good. The cata-
 logue of the virtues will therefore include the virtues required to sustain
  the kind of households and the kind of political communities in which men
  and women can seek for the good together and the virtues necessary for
  philosophical enquiry about the character of the good. We have then ar-
  rived at a provisional conclusion about the good life for man: the good life
  for man is the life spent in seeking for the good life for man. and the virtues
  necessary for the seeking are those which will enable us to understand
  what more and what else the good life for man is. We have also completed
220                             After Virtue

the second stage in our account of the vinues, by situating them in relation
to the good life for man and not only in relation to practices. But our en-
quiry requires a third stage.
    For I am never able to seek for the good or exercise the vinues only
qua individual. This is partly because what it is to live the good life con-
cretely varies from circumstance to circumstance even when it is one and
the same conception of the good life and one and the same set of vinues
which are being embodied in a human life. What the good life is for a
fifth-century Athenian general will not be the same as what it was for a
medieval nun or a seventeenth-century farmer. But it is not just that dif-
ferent individuals live in different social circumstances; it is also that we
all approach our own circumstances as bearers of a panicular social iden-
tity. I am someone's son or daughter, someone else's cousin or uncle; 1 am
a citizen of this or that city, a member of this or that guild or profession;
I belong to this clan, that tribe, this nation. Hence what is good for me
has to be the good for one who inhabits these roles. As such, I inherit from
the past of my family, my city, my tribe, my nation, a variety of debts,
inheritances, rightful expectations and obligations. These constitute the
given of my life, my moral staning point . This is in pan what gives my
life its own moral panicularity.
     This thought is likely to appear alien and even suprising from the stand-
 point of modern individualism . From the standpoint of individualism I am
 what 1 myself choose to be. 1 can always, if 1 wish to, put in question what
 are taken to be the merely contingent social features of my existence. I
 may biologically be my father's son; but 1 cannot be held responsible for
 what he did unless 1 choose implicitly or explicitly to assume such responsi-
 bility. I may legally be a citizen of a cenain country; but 1 cannot be held
 responsible for what my country does or has done unless 1 choose implic-
 itly or explicitly to assume such responsibility. Such individualism is ex-
 pressed by those modern Americans who deny any responsibility for the
 effects of slavery upon black Americans, saying 'I never owned any slaves'.
 It is more subtly the standpoint of those other modern Americans who
 accept a nicely calculated responsibility for such effects measured precisely
 by the benefits they themselves as individuals have indirectly received from
 slavery. In both cases 'being an American' is not in itself taken to be pan
 of the moral identity of the individual. And of course there is nothing
 peculiar to modern Americans in this attitude: the Englishman who says,
 '[ never did any wrong to Ireland; why bring up that old history as though
 it had something to do with me?' or the young German who believes that
  being born after 1945 means that what Nazis did to Jews has no moral
  relevance to his relationship to his Jewish contemporaries, exhibit the same
                Virtues, Unity of Life and Concept of a Tradition          221

attitude, that according to which the self is detachable from its social and
historical roles and statuses. And the self so detached is of course a self very
much at home in either Same's or Goffman's perspective, a self that can
have no history. The contrast with the narrative view of the self is dear.
For the story of my life is always embedded in the story of those commu-
nities from which I derive my identity. I am born with a past; and to try
to cut myself off from that past, in the individualist mode, is to deform
my present relationships. The possession of an historical identity and the
possession of a social identity coincide. Notice that rebellion against my
identity is always one possible mode of expressing it.
     Notice also that the fact that the self has to find its moral identity in
and through its membership in communities such as those of the family,
the neighborhood, the city and the tribe does not entail that the self has
to accept the moral limitations of the panicularity of those forms of com-
munity. Without those moral panicularities to begin from there would
never be anywhere to begin; but it is in moving forward from such par-
ticularity that the search for the good, for the universal, consists. Yet par-
ticularity can never be simply left behind or obliterated. The notion of
 escaping from it into a realm of entirely universal maxims which belong
 to man as such, whether in its eighteenth-century Kantian form or in the
 presentation of some modem analytical moral philosophies, is an illusion
 and an illusion with painful consequences. When men and women identify
 what are in fact their panial and panicular causes too easily and too com-
 pletely with the cause of some universal principle, they usually behave
 worse than they would otherwise do.
     What I am, therefore, is in key pan what I inherit. a specific past that
 is present to some degree in my present. I find myself pan of a history and
 that is generally to say. whether I like it or not, whether I recognize it or
 not. one of the bearers of a tradition. It was imponant when I character-
  ized the concept of a practice to notice that practices always have histories
 and that at any given moment what a practice is depends on a mode of
  understanding it which has been transmitted often through many genera-
  tions. And thus. insofar as the vinues sustain the relationships required for
  practices, they have to sustain relationships to the past-and to the future
  -as well as in the present. But the traditions through which panicular
  practices are transmitted and reshaped never exist in isolation for larger
  social traditions. What constitutes such traditions?
      We are apt to be misled here by the ideological uses to which the con-
  cept of a tradition has been put by conservative political theorists. Charac-
  teristically such theorists have followed Burke in contrasting tradition with
   reason and the stability of tradition with conflict. Both contrasts obfuscate.
222                               After Virtue

For all reasoning takes place within the context of some traditional mode
of thought, transcending through criticism and invention the limitations of
what had hitherto been reasoned in that tradition; this is as true of modern
physics as of medieval logic. Moreover when a tradition is in good order
it is always partially constituted by an argument about the goods the pur-
suit of which gives to that tradition its particular point and purpose.
     So when an institution - a university, say, or a farm, or a hospital- is
the bearer of a tradition of practice or practices, its common life will be
partly, but in a centrally important way, constituted by a continuous argu-
ment as to what a university is and ought to be or what good farming is
or what good medicine is. Traditions, when vital, embody continuities of
conflict. Indeed when a tradition becomes Burkean, it is always dying or
dead.
     The individualism of modernity could of course find no use for the no-
tion of tradition within its own conceptual scheme except as an adversary
notion; it therefore all too willingly abandoned it to the Burkeans, who,
faithful to Burke's own allegiance, tried to combine adherence in politics
to a conception of tradition which would vindicate the oligarchical revolu-
tion of property of 1688 and adherence in economics to the doctrine and
 institutions of the free market. The theoretical incoherence of this mis-
 match did not deprive it of ideological usefulness. But the outcome has
been that modern conservatives are for the most part engaged in conserv-
 ing only older rather than later versions of liberal individualism. Their own
 core doctrine is as liberal and as individualist as that of self-avowed liberals.
     A living tradition then is an historically extended, socially embodied
 argument, and an argument precisely in part about the goods which con-
 stitute that tradition . Within a. tradition the pursuit of goods extends
 through generations, sometimes through many generations. Hence the in-
 dividual's search for his or her good is generally and characteristically con-
 ducted within a context defined by those traditions of which the in-
 dividual's life is a part, and this is true both of those goods which are inter-
 nal to practices and of the goods of a single life. Once again the narrative
 phenomenon of embedding is crucial: the history of a practice in our time
  is generally and characteristically embedded in and made intelligible in
 terms of the larger and longer history of the tradition through which the
  practice in its present form was conveyed to us; the history of each of our
 own lives is generally and characteristically embedded in and made intelligi-
  ble in terms of the larger and longer histories of a number of traditions.
  I have to say 'generally and characteristically' rather than 'always', for tradi-
  tions decay, disintegrate and disappear. What then sustains and strengthens
  traditions? What weakens and destroys them?
                Virtues. Unity of Lift and Concept of a Tradition           223

     The answer in key part is: the exercise or the lack of exercise of the rele-
vant virtues. The virtues find their point and purpose not only in sustain-
ing those relationships necessary if the variety of goods internal to practices
are to be achieved and not only in sustaining the form of an individual life
in which that individual may seek out his or her good as the good of his
or her whole life, but also in sustaining those traditions which provide both
practices and individual lives with their necessary historical context. Lack
of justice, lack of truthfulness. lack of courage. lack of the relevant intellec-
tual virtues-these corrupt traditions, just as they do those institutions and
practices which derive their life from the traditions of which they are the
contemporary embodiments. To recognize this is of course also to recog-
nize the existence of an additional virtue, one whose importance is perhaps
 most obvious when it is least present, the virtue of having an adequate
 sense of the traditions to which one belongs or which confront one. This
 virtue is not to be confused with any form of conservative antiquarianism ;
 I am not praising those who choose the conventional conservative role of
 laudator temporis act;. It is rather the case that an adequate sense of tradition
 manifests itself in a grasp of those future possibilities which the past has
 made available to the present. Living traditions, just because they continue
 a not-yet-completed narrative, confront a future whose determinate and
 determinable character, so far as it possesses any, derives from the past.
      In practical reasoning the possession of this virtue is not manifested so
  much in the knowledge of a set of generalizations or maxims which may
  provide our practical inferences with major premises; its presence or ab-
  sence rather appears in the kind of capacity for judgment which the agent
  possesses in knowing how to select among the relevant stack of maxims
  and how to apply them in particular situations. Cardinal Pole possessed
  it, Mary Tudor did not; Montrose possessed it, Charles I did not . What
  Cardinal Pole and the Marquis of Montrose possessed were in fact those
  virtues which enable their possessors to pursue both their own good and
  the good of the tradition of which they are the bearers even in situations
  defined by the necessity of tragic, dilemmatic choice. Such choices, under-
  stood in the context of the tradition of the virtues, are very different from
   those which face the modem adherents of rival and incommensurable moral
   premises in the debates about which I wrote in Chapter 2. Wherein does
   the difference lie?
       It has often been suggested- by J. L. Austin, for example-that either
   we can admit the existence of rival and contingently incompatible goods
   which make incompatible claims to our practical allegiance or we can be-
   lieve in some determinate conception of the good life for man, but that
   these are mutually exclusive alternatives. No one can consistently hold
224                              After Virtue

both these views. What this contention is blind to is that there may be
better or worse ways for individuals to live through the tragic confronta-
tion of good with good . And that to know what the good life for man
is may require knowing what are the better and what are the worse ways
of living in and through such situations. Nothing a priori rules out this
possibility; and this suggests that within a view such as Austin's there is
concealed an unacknowledged empirical premise about the character of
       . .      .
tragIC situations.
     One way in which the choice between rival goods in a tragic situation
differs from the modern choice between incommensurable moral premises
is that both of the alternative courses of action which confront the indi-
vidual have to be recognized as leading to some authentic and substantial
good . By choosing one I do nothing to diminish or derogate from the
claim upon me of the other; and therefore, whatever I do , I shall have
left undone what I ought to have done. The tragic protagonist, unlike the
 moral agent as depicted by Sartre or Hare, is not choosing between alle-
 giance to one moral principle rather than another, nor is he or she decid-
 ing upon some principle of priority between moral principles. Hence the
 'ought' involved has a different meaning and force from that of the 'ought'
 in moral principles understood in a modern way. For the tragic protagonist
 cannot do everything that he or she ought to do . This 'ought', unlike
 Kant's, does not imply 'can'. Moreover any attempt to map the logic of
 such 'ought' assertions on to some modal calculus so as to produce a ver-
 sion of deontic logic has to fail. (See, from a very different point of view ,
 Bas C. Van Fraasen 1973.)
      Yet it is clear that the moral task of the tragic protagonist may be per-
  formed better or worse, independently of the choice between alternatives
  that he or she makes-ex hypothesi he or she has no right choice to make.
  The tragic protagonist may behave heroically or unheroically, generously
  or ungenerously, gracefully or gracelessly, prudently or imprudently. To
  perform his or her task better rather than worse will be to do both what
  is better for him or her qua individul and qua parent or child or q'Ua citizen
  or member of a profession, or perhaps qua some or all of these. The exis-
  tence of tragic dilemmas casts no doubt upon and provides no counter-
  examples to the thesis that assertions of the form 'To do this in this way
  would be better for X and/or for his or her family, city or profession' are
  susceptible of objective truth and falsity, any more than the existence of
   alternative and contingently incompatible forms of medical treatment casts
   doubt on the thesis that assertions of the form 'To undergo his medical
   treatment in this way would be better for X and/or his or her family' are
   susceptible of objective truth and falsity . (See, from a different point of
               Virtues. Unity of Lift and Concept of a Tradition         225

view. the illuminating discussion in Samuel Guttenplan 1979-80, pp. 61-80).
    The presupposition of this objectivity is of course that we can under-
stand the notion of 'good for X' and cognate notions in terms of some con-
ception of the unity of X's life. What is better or worse for X depends
upon the character of that intelligible narrative which provides X's life with
its unity. Unsurprisingiy it is the lack of any such unifying conception of
a human life which underlies modem denials of the factual character of
moral judgments and more especially of those judgments which ascribe vir-
tues or vices to individuals.
    I argued earlier that every moral philosophy has some particular sociol-
ogy as its counterpart . What I have tried to spell out in this chapter is the
kind of understanding of social life which the tradition of the virtues re-
quires. a kind of understanding very different from those dominant in the
culture of bureaucratic individualism. Within that culture conceptions of
the virtues become marginal and the tradition of the virtues remains cen-
 tral only in the lives of social groups whose existence is on the margins of
 the central culture. Within the central cultural of liberal or bureaucratic
 individualism new conceptions of the virtues emerge and the concept of
 a virtue is itself transformed. To the history of that transformation I
 therefore now turn; for we shall only understand the tradition of the vir-
 tues fully if we understand to what kinds of degeneration it has proved
 liable.
