2025 Philosophy Subject Assessment Advice

Overview

This subject assessment advice, based on the 2025 assessment cycle, gives an overview of how students performed in their school and external assessments in relation to the learning requirements, assessment design criteria, and performance standards set out in the relevant subject outline. It provides information and advice regarding the assessment types, the application of the performance standards in school and external assessments, and the quality of student performance.

The Subject Renewal program has introduced changes for many subjects in 2025; these changes are detailed in the change log at the front of each subject outline. 

School Assessment

Teachers can improve the moderation process and the online process by:

thoroughly checking that all grades entered in school online are correct

ensuring the uploaded tasks are legible, all facing up (and all the same way), and remove blank pages and student notes

ensuring the uploaded responses have pages the same size and in colour so teacher marking, and comments are clear.

Assessment Type 1: AT1

Students complete two Argument Analysis tasks. Each task is to consider a different type of text. Students apply their knowledge of reasoning and argument in identifying and analysing the arguments. They identify the key premises and show how evidence for the premises is developed within the chosen text. The key arguments are placed in ‘Standard Form’ and the type of argument is identified (e.g. deductive or inductive) and the logical strength of the argument is analysed. 

Teachers can elicit more successful responses by:

choosing a text for analysis that has some clear arguments for analysis. For example, persuasive texts tend to have easily identifiable arguments e.g. documentaries, opinion pieces, promotional material, TED talks. 

The more successful responses commonly:

identified key arguments from the chosen text and express the key arguments in ‘Standard Form’ (numbered premises followed by a conclusion). The inclusion of the argument in Standard Form then enabled the student to show the logical flow of the argument and also discuss the features of the argument with more clarity (RA2)

used accurate terminology. For example, the terms valid and sound were used accurately in relation to deductive arguments and inductive arguments were analysed using the correct terminology for inductive arguments e.g. cogent and strong/weak (C2)

explored the truth of a premise and the subsequent impact on the argument’s cogency (for inductive arguments or soundness (deductive arguments) (CA1)

showcased the student’s original critical thinking, rather than tertiary analysis of others’ views of the chosen text (CA1)

followed one referencing convention consistently.

The less successful responses commonly:

did not clearly identify an argument from within the text and did not present an argument in ‘standard form’

provided a very lengthy recount or summary of the text being analysed rather than identifying key arguments for analysis

used argument terminology inaccurately. For example, the terms valid and sound were frequently inaccurately used

relied on critics' analysis of famous philosophical arguments from secondary sources

analysed narrative elements without relating them to the argument. For example, symbolism, sound, images, irony, or analogy.

Assessment Type 2: AT2

Students undertake two or three issues analysis assessments, from one of the key areas in the Subject Outline- ethics, epistemology, or metaphysics.

Teachers can elicit more successful responses by:

using class time to analyse, discuss, and apply philosophical approaches that are within the scope of the subject outline

setting a task that allows students to move beyond producing an ‘information report’ and able to develop a well-reasoned opinion on an issue -thus enabling the generation of evidence for RA2,3

requiring clear referencing of ideas.

The more successful responses commonly:

clearly defined the philosophical issue or question and created a logical, clear, coherent essay relating to the thesis set (C1)

demonstrated knowledge and understanding of various philosophical positions and why those positions were held (KU1,2, RA1,2)

critically analysed the strengths and weaknesses of various philosophical positions (CA1) and developed their own response that followed logically from their interrogation of the issue (RA3)

demonstrated originality of thought (CA1)

had a very high standard of academic referencing. (C2)

The less successful responses commonly:

did not specifically define an issue or question

did not format essay in a structured way, making reasoning and flow of ideas difficult to follow

focused on addressing specific features in Knowledge and Understanding assessment design criteria at the expense of other specific features such as Critical Analysis

focussed too much on biographical details

included only one philosopher’s perspective

were poorly edited, misspelling names and terminology

did not appropriately acknowledge sources.

External Assessment

Teachers can elicit more successful responses by:

ensuring that the topic chosen is within the scope of the philosophy course- ethics, epistemology, or metaphysics

helping students to create their topic question for the Issues Study – Aim to create a question that allows the student to research a range of philosophical positions (KU1,2) and the arguments for and against those positions (RA1,2). Setting a ‘question’ as the topic supports the student with generating evidence for critical analysis (CA1) and their own well-reasoned response. (RA3)

Assessment Type 3: Investigation

Students undertake one issues study. They examine a philosophical issue from any of the key philosophical areas, choosing the issue in negotiation with their teacher. 

The more successful responses commonly:

used high quality communicative skills that enabled the production of logical, clear, and well organised academic prose (C1)

having set a topic question, the student included several philosophical positions (KU1,2) and explained the arguments underpinning those positions in relation to the question. The strengths and weaknesses of those positions were analysed with depth and originality (CA1)

clearly presented and defended their own position on the question (RA3) Their opinion followed through with the essay’s thesis and was rational

had accurate, high-quality referencing which supported the well-researched essay.

The less successful responses commonly:

set a ‘topic’ rather than a specific question or issue. Having a ‘topic’ led some students to produce work in the style of an information report. This hindered the ability to generate evidence for RA 2,3 and CA1

had limited original critical analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of philosophical perspectives (CA1)

did not present and defend the student’s own position (RA3). This most likely occurred as the topic was not set as a question

presented a weak personal opinion which had little reference (or relevance) to the content of the essay (RA3)

included ideas from other academic disciplines such as psychology which limited generating evidence for the philosophy performance standards (e.g. irrelevant to KU1,2 RA1,2, CA1.)

had weaker communicative skills resulting in text that was less logical or clear and may have had errors with spelling or problematic word choices.