ASSESSMENT SCOPE AND REQUIREMENTS

All Stage 2 subjects have a school assessment component and an external assessment component.

EVIDENCE OF LEARNING

The following assessment types enable students to demonstrate their learning in Stage 2 Philosophy:

School Assessment (70%)

Assessment Type 1: Argument Analysis (25%)

Assessment Type 2: Issues Analysis (45%)

External Assessment (30%)

Assessment Type 3: Issues Study (30%).

Students should provide evidence of their learning through five or six assessments, including the external assessment component. Students undertake:

two argument analysis assessments

two or three issues analysis assessments 

one issues study.

Students undertake two or three issues analysis assessments. Each issues analysis assessment focuses on a key area. Students completing two assessments only need to address two key areas.

ASSESSMENT DESIGN CRITERIA

The assessment design criteria are based on the learning requirements and are used by:

teachers to clarify for the student what they need to learn

teachers and assessors to design opportunities for the student to provide evidence of their learning at the highest possible level of achievement.

The assessment design criteria consist of specific features that:

students should demonstrate in their learning

teachers and assessors look for as evidence that students have met the learning requirements.

For this subject the assessment design criteria are:

knowledge and understanding

reasoning and argument

critical analysis

communication.

The specific features of these criteria are described below.

The set of assessments, as a whole, must give students opportunities to demonstrate each of the specific features by the completion of study of the subject.

Knowledge and Understanding

The specific features are as follows:

KU1  Knowledge and understanding of philosophical issues and positions.

KU2 Understanding of reasons and arguments used by philosophers on issues and positions.

Reasoning and Argument

The specific features are as follows:

RA1Explanation of the philosophical nature of issues and positions.

RA2Explanation of the flow of logic and evidence of arguments leading to conclusions. 

RA3Formulation and defence of philosophical positions.

Critical Analysis

The specific feature is as follows:

CA1Critical analysis of strengths and weaknesses of philosophical assumptions, positions, and arguments.

Communication

The specific features are as follows:

C1Communication of philosophical issues and positions, using the conventions of philosophical argument.

C2Use of appropriate philosophical terminology, and acknowledgment of sources.

SCHOOL ASSESSMENT

Assessment Type 1: Argument Analysis (25%)

Students undertake two argument analysis assessments. In each they consider a different type of text chosen from, for example, popular news programs, poetry, film, lyrics, interest group pronouncements, and reports.

Students apply their knowledge of reasoning and argument in identifying and analysing the arguments of others. They provide evidence and reasons to support or refute counter arguments. Students may compare how evidence for the premises of argument is developed in particular forms (e.g. through symbolism, sound, images, irony, or analogy). Students analyse the logical strength of arguments.

The presentation may be written, oral, or in multimodal form. An argument analysis assessment should be a maximum of 1000 words if written or a maximum of 7 minutes if oral, or the equivalent in multimodal form. At least one assessment should be presented in writing.

For this assessment type, students provide evidence of their learning primarily in relation to the following assessment design criteria:

reasoning and argument

critical analysis

communication.

Assessment Type 2: Issues Analysis (45%)

Students undertake two or three issues analysis assessments, one for each of the key areas: ethics, epistemology, and metaphysics. Students identify:

why the issue chosen is a philosophical issue

different responses to the philosophical issue

what position they will take in response to the philosophical issue

a justifiable defence for the position taken

how they will communicate this position to others.

Teachers negotiate with students the conditions under which this assessment type is assessed. The presentation may be written, oral, or in multimodal form and could include role plays, oral presentations, written arguments, scripted dialogues, multimedia presentations, responses to letters to the editor, films, or videos.

Presentations should be a maximum of 1500 words if written or a maximum of 10 minutes if oral, or the equivalent in multimodal form. At least one assessment should be presented in writing.

For this assessment type, students provide evidence of their learning primarily in relation to the following assessment design criteria:

knowledge and understanding

reasoning and argument

communication.

EXTERNAL ASSESSMENT

Assessment Type 3: Issues Study (30%)

Students undertake one issues study.

They examine a philosophical issue from any of the key areas, choosing the issue in negotiation with their teacher. Students consider the following questions:

Why is it a philosophical issue?

What positions do various philosophers hold?

What are the philosophers’ reasons for holding these positions?

What objections or counter examples are relevant to these positions?

What is the student’s own position, and why?

The issues study should be a maximum of 2000 words if written, a maximum of 12 minutes for an oral presentation, or the equivalent in multimodal form.

All specific features of the assessment design criteria for this subject are assessed in the issues study.

PERFORMANCE STANDARDS

The performance standards describe five levels of achievement, A to E.

Each level of achievement describes the knowledge, skills, and understanding that teachers and assessors refer to in deciding how well a student has demonstrated their learning on the basis of the evidence provided.

During the teaching and learning program the teacher gives students feedback on their learning, with reference to the performance standards.

At the student’s completion of study of each school assessment type, the teacher makes a decision about the quality of the student’s learning by:

referring to the performance standards

assigning a grade between A and E for the assessment type.

The student’s school assessment and external assessment are combined for a final result, which is reported as a grade between A and E.

Performance Standards for Stage 2 Philosophy

Knowledge   and  Understanding | Reasoning   and  Argument | Critical   Analysis | Communication
A | Consistently clear and   perceptive   knowledge   and   understanding   of   philosophical issues and   positions. In-depth and well-informed   understanding of reasons   and arguments used by   philosophers   on   issues   and   positions. | Insightful   and   coherent   explanation of the   philosophical   nature   of   issues and positions. Insightful and coherent   explanation   of   the   flow   of   logic and evidence of   arguments leading to   conclusions. Coherent and convincing   formulation   and   defence   of   positions   taken. | Perceptive   critical   analysis   of   strengths and weaknesses   of   philosophical   assumptions, positions, and   arguments. | Consistently clear, coherent,   and   fluent   communication   of   philosophical issues and   positions, with appropriate   conventions   consistently   observed. Accurate, consistent, and   discerning use of   philosophical   terminology,   with   appropriate   acknowledgment   of   sources.
B | Clear and thoughtful   knowledge   and   understanding   of   philosophical   issues   and   positions. Well-informed   understanding   of reasons and arguments   used by philosophers on   issues and positions. | Thoughtful and clear   explanation of the   philosophical   nature   of   issues and positions. Thoughtful and clear   explanation   of   the   flow   of   logic and evidence of   arguments leading to   conclusions. Convincing   formulation   and   defence of positions taken. | Well-considered   critical   analysis of strengths and   weaknesses   of   philosophical   assumptions, positions, and   arguments. | Clear and coherent   communication   of   philosophical issues and   positions,   with   appropriate   conventions   mostly   observed. Mostly   accurate   and   relevant   use of philosophical   terminology,   with   appropriate   acknowledgment   of   sources.
C | Generally   clear   knowledge   and understanding of   philosophical issues and   positions. Informed understanding of   some reasons and   arguments used by   philosophers   on   issues   and   positions. | Considered   and   generally   clear explanation of the   philosophical nature of   issues and positions. Considered and generally   clear   explanation   of   the   flow   of logic and evidence of   arguments leading to   conclusions. Considered   formulation   and   defence of positions taken. | Considered   analysis   of   some   strengths and weaknesses   of   philosophical   assumptions, positions, and   arguments. | Competent   communication   of   philosophical   issues   and   positions, with some   appropriate   conventions   observed. Generally appropriate use of   philosophical   terminology,   with mostly appropriate   acknowledgment   of   sources.
D | Some recognition and   awareness of a few   philosophical   issues   and   positions. Identification of some   reasons   or   arguments   used   by   philosophers   on   an   issue   and/or a position. | Partial or superficial   description of the   philosophical   nature   of   one   or more issues and/or   positions. Some   consideration   of   evidence   of   arguments   leading   to  conclusions. Partial formulation and   defence   of   positions   taken. | Some description of   strengths   and   weaknesses   of   philosophical   assumptions,   positions,   and/or   arguments. | Partial communication of   aspects of a philosophical   issue and/or position, with   inconsistent   use   of   a   limited   range of appropriate   conventions. Use of a limited range of   appropriate   philosophical   terminology, with some   acknowledgment   of   sources.

Knowledge and Understanding

Reasoning and Argument

Critical Analysis

Communication

A

Consistently clear and perceptive knowledge and understanding of philosophical issues and positions.

In-depth and well-informed understanding of reasons and arguments used by philosophers on issues and positions.

Insightful and coherent explanation of the philosophical nature of issues and positions.

Insightful and coherent explanation of the flow of logic and evidence of arguments leading to conclusions.

Coherent and convincing formulation and defence of positions taken.

Perceptive critical analysis of strengths and weaknesses of philosophical assumptions, positions, and arguments.

Consistently clear, coherent, and fluent communication of philosophical issues and positions, with appropriate conventions consistently observed.

Accurate, consistent, and discerning use of philosophical terminology, with appropriate acknowledgment of sources.

B

Clear and thoughtful knowledge and understanding of philosophical issues and positions.

Well-informed understanding of reasons and arguments used by philosophers on issues and positions.

Thoughtful and clear explanation of the philosophical nature of issues and positions.

Thoughtful and clear explanation of the flow of logic and evidence of arguments leading to conclusions.

Convincing formulation and defence of positions taken.

Well-considered critical analysis of strengths and weaknesses of philosophical assumptions, positions, and arguments.

Clear and coherent communication of philosophical issues and positions, with appropriate conventions mostly observed.

Mostly accurate and relevant use of philosophical terminology, with appropriate acknowledgment of sources.

C

Generally clear knowledge and understanding of philosophical issues and positions.

Informed understanding of some reasons and arguments used by philosophers on issues and positions.

Considered and generally clear explanation of the philosophical nature of issues and positions.

Considered and generally clear explanation of the flow of logic and evidence of arguments leading to conclusions.

Considered formulation and defence of positions taken.

Considered analysis of some strengths and weaknesses of philosophical assumptions, positions, and arguments.

Competent communication of philosophical issues and positions, with some appropriate conventions observed.

Generally appropriate use of philosophical terminology, with mostly appropriate acknowledgment of sources.

D

Some recognition and awareness of a few philosophical issues and positions.

Identification of some reasons or arguments used by philosophers on an issue and/or a position.

Partial or superficial description of the philosophical nature of one or more issues and/or positions.

Some consideration of evidence of arguments leading to conclusions.

Partial formulation and defence of positions taken.

Some description of strengths and weaknesses of philosophical assumptions, positions, and/or arguments.

Partial communication of aspects of a philosophical issue and/or position, with inconsistent use of a limited range of appropriate conventions.

Use of a limited range of appropriate philosophical terminology, with some acknowledgment of sources.

Knowledge   and  Understanding | Reasoning   and  Argument | Critical   Analysis | Communication
E | Emerging recognition of   what   is   philosophical   in   an   issue or position. Attempted identification of   elements of a reason or   argument used by a   philosopher   on   an   issue   or   a   position. | Attempted   description   of   the   nature of a philosophical   issue or position. Emerging   awareness   of   the   need to use evidence to   develop an argument or   position. Emerging   awareness   of   one   or   more   elements   of   a   good   argument. | Identification   of   a   strength   or   weakness of a philosophical   assumption, position, or   argument. | Attempted   communication   of an aspect of a   philosophical issue or   position. Limited use of any   philosophical   terminology,   with   limited   acknowledgment   of   sources.

Knowledge and Understanding

Reasoning and Argument

Critical Analysis

Communication

E

Emerging recognition of what is philosophical in an issue or position.

Attempted identification of elements of a reason or argument used by a philosopher on an issue or a position.

Attempted description of the nature of a philosophical issue or position.

Emerging awareness of the need to use evidence to develop an argument or position.

Emerging awareness of one or more elements of a good argument.

Identification of a strength or weakness of a philosophical assumption, position, or argument.

Attempted communication of an aspect of a philosophical issue or position.

Limited use of any philosophical terminology, with limited acknowledgment of sources.