OFFICIAL

Philosophy

Subject Outline | Stage 2

SUBJECT OUTLINE CHANGES

Below are the current changes to the subject outline. Teachers are encouraged to explore the changes in detail and make relevant adjustments to their teaching, learning, and assessment programs. 

From   2024 | To   2025  onwards | page
Stage  2
Students should provide evidence of their learning through six assessments, including the  external assessment component. Students undertake: two argument analysis assessments three issues analysis assessments (one for each key area) one issues study. | Students should provide evidence of their learning through  five or six  assessments, including the external assessment component. Students undertake: two argument analysis assessments two or three  issues analysis assessments (one for each key area) one issues study. | 1 3 ,  1 5
Assessment Type 3: Issues Study The issues study is to be presented in written form, but it does not need to be in an essay format and could include dialogue or any other written form. The study should be a maximum of 2000 words. | Assessment Type 3: Issues Study The issues study should be a maximum of 2000 words if written, a maximum of 12 minutes for an oral presentation, or the equivalent in multimodal form. | 1 6

From 2024

To 2025 onwards

      page

Stage 2

Students should provide evidence of their learning through six assessments, including the external assessment component. Students undertake:

two argument analysis assessments

three issues analysis assessments (one for each key area)

one issues study.

Students should provide evidence of their learning through five or six assessments, including the external assessment component. Students undertake:

two argument analysis assessments

two or three issues analysis assessments (one for each key area)

one issues study.

13, 15

Assessment Type 3: Issues Study

The issues study is to be presented in written form, but it does not need to be in an essay format and could include dialogue or any other written form. The study should be a maximum of 2000 words.

Assessment Type 3: Issues Study

The issues study should be a maximum of 2000 words if written, a maximum of 12 minutes for an oral presentation, or the equivalent in multimodal form.

16

Published by the SACE Board of South Australia,

11 Waymouth Street, Adelaide, South Australia 5000 Copyright © SACE Board of South Australia 2010 First published 2010

Reissued for 2011 (published online October 2010, printed January 2011), 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016,

2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022, 2023, 2024, 2025

ISBN 978 1 74102 965 9 (online Microsoft Word version)

ref: A1439951

This subject outline is accredited for teaching at Stage 2 from 2011

CONTENTS

Introduction1

Subject Description1

Capabilities1

Literacy in Philosophy3

Numeracy in Philosophy4

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Knowledge, Cultures, and Perspectives4

Stage 2 Philosophy5

Learning Scope and Requirements5

Learning Requirements5

Content5

Assessment Scope and Requirements13

Evidence of Learning13

Assessment Design Criteria13

School Assessment14

External Assessment15

Performance Standards16

Assessment Integrity19

Support Materials20

Subject-specific Advice20

Advice on Ethical Study and Research20

INTRODUCTION

SUBJECT DESCRIPTION

Philosophy is a 10-credit subject or a 20-credit subject at Stage 1, and a 20-credit subject at Stage 2.

Students learn that philosophy is part of life: it shapes the way people think, what they consider to be of value, what they take as being the truth, and how they engage with others and the world around them. Historically and now, philosophers have been recognised as teachers of wisdom whose contributions have helped to form society and its visions for the future.

Philosophy involves the rational investigation of questions about existence, knowledge, and ethics, to which there are no simple answers. Consequently, philosophical problems tend to provoke disagreement and foster a variety of views and theories about the nature of the world and what ought to be done. Investigation of these problems requires skills of critical reasoning, developed through an understanding of reasoning and the foundations of argument analysis.

Philosophy promotes respect for intellectual integrity as a human value and develops students’ skills to engage in philosophical argument. Students build their capacity to be creative and independent critical thinkers who can articulate and justify philosophical positions and argue reasoned action.

CAPABILITIES

The capabilities connect student learning within and across subjects in a range of contexts. They include essential knowledge and skills that enable people to act in effective and successful ways.

The five capabilities that have been identified are:

communication

citizenship

personal development

work

learning.

The capabilities for citizenship, communication, personal development, and learning are reflected in the learning requirements, assessment design criteria, and performance standards. Students develop these capabilities through their critical thinking skills and knowledge of philosophy (which can be applied throughout their lives as global citizens) to analyse philosophical and other arguments or positions; formulate and communicate good arguments; and assist with solving complex problems in ethical ways, whether for themselves or with, and for, others.

Communication

In Philosophy, students develop an understanding of, and skills to use, language and concepts of philosophy to identify philosophical aspects of issues, analyse philosophical arguments, and explain the flow of logic leading to their conclusions. Students develop skills in disciplined collaborative dialogue through the ‘community of inquiry’ pedagogy.

Students structure texts appropriately for particular purposes, using the conventions of philosophical argument.

Students communicate their learning through a range of assessments, in written, oral, and/or multimodal forms, which may include extended prose, debate, dialogue, or other forms. Students may communicate within and across cultures to understand what different cultures consider right and wrong, and alternative ways of thinking and knowing.

Students may use qualitative or quantitative evidence when communicating support for, or contesting positions on, issues. They may use information and communication technologies to acquire evidence and/or communicate their reasoned arguments.

Students express and sometimes challenge their own ideas and opinions.

Citizenship

In Philosophy, students have opportunities to develop skills to identify rational and ethical argument for civic, social, political, economic, environmental, and legal participation.

Contemporary issues considered by students may include Indigenous and other social justice issues, and they may involve social relativism, racism, and/or environmental sustainability.

Personal Development

In Philosophy, students’ personal identity can be further developed through their growing understanding of ethics, metaphysics, and epistemology. In analysing their own ideas and opinions and those of others, students reflect on the purpose, direction, and decision- making about their present and future. The knowledge and skills that students gain in reasoning and argument can be applied to aspects of their current and future lives.

Work

In Philosophy, students develop and apply skills such as problem-solving and creative thinking, as well as knowledge relevant to a range of local and global vocational pathways, situations, and livelihoods, including, for example, law, government, entertainment, education, corporate business, and tourism. Students may investigate the notions of rights and responsibilities, and the distinction between political and human rights, and develop their skills to discuss, analyse, and resolve conflicts. Their developing skills of reasoning and argument help prepare them to understand their rights and the rights of others (e.g. in future work and community life).

Learning

In Philosophy, students participate in a ‘community of inquiry’ to identify skills of reasoning and critical analysis of arguments, using the terminology and concepts of philosophy.

Students use reasoning and evidence to differentiate good and bad arguments. Students identify and analyse philosophical positions on issues, using a range of perspectives, and suggest what ought to be done. Competing concepts of social justice may be analysed for their underlying philosophical views. Students discuss the concept of the common good and the processes this involves.

Students develop understanding of what makes an argument valid and/or sound and differentiate inductive and deductive arguments. Students develop understanding of the role of circumstances in shaping moral codes in societies and cultures; the extent to which people can point to universally defensible underlying moral principles; and the logical and moral basis on which any such principles can be justified. Philosophy is at the heart of learning.

LITERACY IN PHILOSOPHY

Students should have opportunities to develop their literacy skills in Philosophy, using the terminology and concepts of the subject in meaningful contexts. Such contexts should include locating and organising information, listening, questioning, viewing, reading, discussing, debating, writing, and role playing. Text refers to print, electronic, oral, and visual texts.

Students identify a philosophical issue and use reasoning and critical analysis to test assumptions relating to different positions and arguments about the issue. They may consider elements of context, purpose, bias, intent, inference, accuracy, relevance, reliability, and authority of views, as well as views excluded.

Students develop their skills in identifying philosophical views, questioning the soundness of arguments with emphasis on reasons, and making their own arguments supported with theory and evidence. The emphasis of argument in philosophy is on depth rather than on breadth. Students identify weak and strong arguments, using inductive and deductive reasoning. They make conclusions based on the flow of logic and evaluation of the relative weight of arguments (points and counterpoints).

As part of understanding the literacy of philosophy and the nature of argument, students develop skills in evaluating arguments as a whole and make conclusions about the strength of the argument. Conventions of a philosophical argument include premises justified by inductive or deductive reasoning, leading to a conclusion that flows logically from the premises.

NUMERACY IN PHILOSOPHY

In Philosophy, students have opportunities to develop numeracy skills. These skills enable students to:

interpolate, extrapolate, and interpret statistical information

interpolate: estimate (values) in between known ones in the same range

extrapolate: estimate (values) beyond the range of data

interpret: decide intended meaning

understand the language of mathematics (including how a term in mathematics may have a different meaning in other contexts)

understand and use graphic illustrations

consider statistical reliability of surveys

consider when it is safe to generalise in relation to data

consider parallels between logic in philosophy and logic in mathematics.

ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDER KNOWLEDGE, CULTURES, AND PERSPECTIVES

In partnership with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities, and schools and school sectors, the SACE Board of South Australia supports the development of high- quality learning and assessment design that respects the diverse knowledge, cultures, and perspectives of Indigenous Australians.

The SACE Board encourages teachers to include Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander knowledge and perspectives in the design, delivery, and assessment of teaching and learning programs by:

providing opportunities in SACE subjects for students to learn about Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander histories, cultures, and contemporary experiences

recognising and respecting the significant contribution of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples to Australian society

drawing students’ attention to the value of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander knowledge and perspectives from the past and the present

promoting the use of culturally appropriate protocols when engaging with and learning from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and communities.

Stage 2 Philosophy

LEARNING SCOPE AND REQUIREMENTS

LEARNING REQUIREMENTS

The learning requirements summarise the knowledge, skills, and understanding that students are expected to develop and demonstrate through their learning in

Stage 2 Philosophy.

In this subject, students are expected to:

identify and understand philosophical issues and positions

demonstrate knowledge of the role of reasoning and argument in the expression of philosophical issues and positions

critically analyse assumptions, positions, and arguments presented by philosophers, themselves, and others

formulate and argue a philosophical position

communicate philosophical issues and positions, using the conventions of philosophical argument.

CONTENT

Stage 2 Philosophy is a 20-credit subject that consists of two sections:

Philosophical Inquiry Skills

Key Areas of Philosophical Study.

The three key areas for study are ethics, epistemology, and metaphysics. Students undertake an in-depth study of one topic from each key area.

Philosophical Inquiry Skills

Philosophical inquiry skills are the cognitive skills of reasoning, critical analysis,

problem-solving, and evaluation of arguments. Students study and apply the principles of reasoning, and identify forms of reasoning and the structure of argument. These skills are developed and applied throughout the Key Areas of Philosophical Study:

ethics — a study of moral values, reasoning about what is right and wrong

epistemology — a study of theories of knowledge and knowing

metaphysics — a study of the nature of existence and reality (what there is in the world).

Assessing arguments is a fundamental skill that students need to develop and apply throughout Stage 2 Philosophy. Students should become familiar with the general principles of reasoning:

types of reasoning

the general structure of arguments

the differences between good and bad arguments

what makes an argument valid and what makes an argument sound

Key Areas of Philosophical Study

Key Area 1: Ethics

Ethics is a philosophical study of moral values and reasoning about right and wrong. Ethical theories provide frameworks for understanding moral disputes and conflicting claims.

A variety of topics can be explored in a study of ethics. Those selected for this key area are:

moral understanding

happiness as the goal of life

rights and responsibilities

equality and difference.

Moral Understanding

Moral debates and moral disagreements are common features of contemporary society (e.g. as in discussions about capital punishment, euthanasia, and the use and control of drugs). Those who take part in these discussions, whether publicly or privately, are attempting to establish a body of values or set of principles to guide society about what is right and what is wrong. It can be difficult to determine what these principles are, and whether or not they are valid.

This topic focuses on moral understanding and moral decision-making. Students could examine the following questions:

Why act morally?

Is being moral part of human nature?

Are there any right answers to moral disagreements?

Does the end justify the means?

Happiness as the Goal of Life

There are certain large questions that everyone considers at some time. One such question is the meaning or purpose of life. Some might say that the purpose of life is to pursue happiness, whereas others might argue that people should try to lead an ethical life, by treating others well and making the world a better place. Yet others would suggest that life has no purpose at all.

This topic covers different conceptions of a ‘good’ life and the possible consequences of these conceptions in deciding practical questions about which social and political policies to support and the kind of world we want to live in.

Students could examine the following questions:

Is a life of pleasure better than a life of virtue?

What have philosophers thought about the purpose of life?

Is a good life for human beings the same as a good life for animals?

Rights and Responsibilities

Many claims are made about rights, who has them, and who does not have them. Do all human beings have the same rights or can some lay claim to special rights?

It is necessary to determine the nature of rights in order to resolve a range of socially vital issues about who has rights and what these rights consist of. It is also important to consider the sphere of moral rights: whether or not other sentient creatures have the same rights as human beings, and the responsibilities of human beings to these creatures and to the environment as a whole.

This topic deals with moral rights, the resolution of conflicting rights, and people’s obligations to each other.

Students could examine the following questions:

Do we have a moral obligation to future generations?

Do we have the right to stop people from doing what they want?

Do animals have rights?

Do we have a moral obligation to protect wilderness areas?

Equality and Difference

Dealing with difference is one of the most important issues of the present age. Are we all just human beings underneath a layer of personality, femininity or masculinity, racial or ethnic identity, or do these layers constitute what we really are?

This topic focuses on the ways in which human difference is perceived, and whether or not there is an essential human nature.

Students could examine the following questions:

Does equality mean treating all people the same or treating people differently?

Is there a fundamental human nature common to all people?

Can equal opportunity legislation alone secure equality in the workplace?

What would an equal and just society look like?

Key Area 2: Epistemology

Epistemology is the study of knowledge and the justification of belief. This key area engages students in discussions about the kinds of beliefs that can be justified and those that cannot be justified, and the relationship between what can be seen or perceived through the senses and what can be known.

A variety of topics can be explored in a study of epistemology. Those selected for this key area are:

ways of knowing

perception

scepticism

relativism.

Ways of Knowing

Where does knowledge come from? Historically, philosophers have answered this question in two ways. Some thinkers have claimed that the primary (or even the only) source of knowledge is experience, whereas others have claimed that knowledge comes mainly (or solely) from the use of reason. Many modern philosophers hold that knowledge is acquired through a procedure that involves both reason and experience.

This topic covers the different ways in which knowledge is described (e.g. scientific knowledge, historical knowledge, mathematical knowledge, moral knowledge, aesthetic knowledge, and so on).

Students could examine the following questions:

What is the scientific method, and how does it differ from the procedures that lead to mathematical knowledge?

Is the scientific method as reliable as we are led to believe by some people in society?

What is the relationship between knowledge and belief?

Perception

Many people take it for granted that what they perceive through their senses actually exists. However, objects can be perceived differently by different observers, or by the same observer in different conditions. The perception of colours is even more puzzling. It is not clear whether colours are properties of objects or creations of the mind. These questions make perception a very interesting issue and have led many philosophers to say that we perceive ideas, impressions, or representations of physical objects rather than the objects themselves. If this is true, there is a gap between the evidence, our ‘sensory data’, and our claims about the existence of physical objects.

This topic examines the link between perceptions and knowledge, and beliefs about the physical world.

Students could examine the following questions:

Does the fact that our senses sometimes mislead us mean that perception is not reliable as a source of evidence about the world?

Are colours in objects or are they only in our minds? Are physical objects directly perceivable?

Scepticism

Two views are commonly stated: that we cannot rely on knowledge gained from what our senses tell us; and that, because experts contradict one another, we cannot know something with any degree of certainty. Both views express what is called a sceptical attitude about what can be known. However, there is a difference between stating that we do not know and stating that we cannot know. Philosophical scepticism deals with the second of these two statements — the claim that knowledge is not possible.

This topic introduces students to the philosophical arguments about scepticism and the replies to these arguments.

Students could examine the following questions:

How do we know that reality is not a dream?

Can we be certain of anything?

How do we know that our world is not virtual?

Relativism

There are many forms of relativism but all assert the same two general principles: that all points of view are equally valid, and that they are relative to a particular framework or standpoint (e.g. personal, cultural, or historical). The different kinds of relativism can be distinguished according to the object they seek to relativise.

This topic focuses on cognitive relativism, which asserts the relativity of truth and, given the close connection between truth and knowledge, the relativity of knowledge.

Students could examine the following questions:

What are the standard objections to relativism?

How can we decide between alternatives?

Are there universal truths?

Key Area 3: Metaphysics

Metaphysics explores existence and reality taken as a whole. Metaphysics can also include exploring the world beyond sensory experience as a way of critically examining things that are taken for granted, or searching for things that exist.

A variety of topics can be explored in a study of metaphysics. Those selected for this key area are:

freedom and determinism

reason and the existence of God

existentialism and humanism

bodies, minds, and persons.

Freedom and Determinism

Most human beings believe they have free will: that when they are in difficult situations they are able to deliberate and make up their minds about what to do. In short, it seems to be common sense that people are able to make free choices between alternative actions. In this topic students consider arguments for and against the view that everything, including human action, is determined in advance by the causes that precede it.

This topic introduces students to the arguments for determinism, to arguments that attempt to reconcile determinism with free will, and to the consequences that determinism has for moral responsibility.

Students could examine the following questions:

Can we be free if there are causes for all our actions?

Is a murderer responsible for their actions?

Is everything we do determined by forces outside our control?

Reason and the Existence of God

Belief in God or a supreme being can be found throughout history and in many cultures. People’s belief in the existence of God is mainly a matter of faith. However, some philosophers have attempted to demonstrate God’s existence through rational argument.

This topic covers the range of arguments that have been used for and against the existence of God or a supreme being.

Students could examine the following questions:

Does God exist?

Is the existence of God necessary to explain the existence of the universe?

Is God’s existence necessary to explain the existence of complex things, especially living things?

Does the existence of evil pose a problem for a belief in the existence of God?

Existentialism and Humanism

The central claim of existentialism, as expressed by Jean-Paul Sartre, is that for human beings existence comes before essence. By this, Sartre means that first people exist and then they reflect on their existence and define themselves. This self-definition determines their nature or essence.

This topic focuses on whether or not there is a predetermined human nature before people reflect on themselves, and whether or not all other things in the universe come into being with a previously determined essence.

Students could examine the following questions:

What are the consequences of existentialism for everyday life?

Are we really free in the radical sense that Sartre claims?

Can we simply make up our own natures?

Are we so radically different from everything else in the universe?

Bodies, Minds, and Persons

Sometimes simple questions can be the hardest to answer. Some questions that have engaged philosophers are:

What am I?

Am I more than my physical body?

What kind of thing is my mind, and what is the relationship between my body and my mind?

Does the mind control the body or the body control the mind, or both?

This topic focuses on the theories philosophers have put forward to explain the nature of conscious experience.

Students could examine the following questions:

Can a computer be conscious?

How is a human mind different from a computer program?

Are human beings more than just very complex machines?

Is the mind distinct from the brain?

ASSESSMENT SCOPE AND REQUIREMENTS

All Stage 2 subjects have a school assessment component and an external assessment component.

EVIDENCE OF LEARNING

The following assessment types enable students to demonstrate their learning in Stage 2 Philosophy:

School Assessment (70%)

Assessment Type 1: Argument Analysis (25%)

Assessment Type 2: Issues Analysis (45%)

External Assessment (30%)

Assessment Type 3: Issues Study (30%).

Students should provide evidence of their learning through five or six assessments, including the external assessment component. Students undertake:

two argument analysis assessments

two or three issues analysis assessments 

one issues study.

Students undertake two or three issues analysis assessments. Each issues analysis assessment focuses on a key area. Students completing two assessments only need to address two key areas.

ASSESSMENT DESIGN CRITERIA

The assessment design criteria are based on the learning requirements and are used by:

teachers to clarify for the student what they need to learn

teachers and assessors to design opportunities for the student to provide evidence of their learning at the highest possible level of achievement.

The assessment design criteria consist of specific features that:

students should demonstrate in their learning

teachers and assessors look for as evidence that students have met the learning requirements.

For this subject the assessment design criteria are:

knowledge and understanding

reasoning and argument

critical analysis

communication.

The specific features of these criteria are described below.

The set of assessments, as a whole, must give students opportunities to demonstrate each of the specific features by the completion of study of the subject.

Knowledge and Understanding

The specific features are as follows:

KU1  Knowledge and understanding of philosophical issues and positions.

KU2 Understanding of reasons and arguments used by philosophers on issues and positions.

Reasoning and Argument

The specific features are as follows:

RA1Explanation of the philosophical nature of issues and positions.

RA2Explanation of the flow of logic and evidence of arguments leading to conclusions. 

RA3Formulation and defence of philosophical positions.

Critical Analysis

The specific feature is as follows:

CA1Critical analysis of strengths and weaknesses of philosophical assumptions, positions, and arguments.

Communication

The specific features are as follows:

C1Communication of philosophical issues and positions, using the conventions of philosophical argument.

C2Use of appropriate philosophical terminology, and acknowledgment of sources.

SCHOOL ASSESSMENT

Assessment Type 1: Argument Analysis (25%)

Students undertake two argument analysis assessments. In each they consider a different type of text chosen from, for example, popular news programs, poetry, film, lyrics, interest group pronouncements, and reports.

Students apply their knowledge of reasoning and argument in identifying and analysing the arguments of others. They provide evidence and reasons to support or refute counter arguments. Students may compare how evidence for the premises of argument is developed in particular forms (e.g. through symbolism, sound, images, irony, or analogy). Students analyse the logical strength of arguments.

The presentation may be written, oral, or in multimodal form. An argument analysis assessment should be a maximum of 1000 words if written or a maximum of 7 minutes if oral, or the equivalent in multimodal form. At least one assessment should be presented in writing.

For this assessment type, students provide evidence of their learning primarily in relation to the following assessment design criteria:

reasoning and argument

critical analysis

communication.

Assessment Type 2: Issues Analysis (45%)

Students undertake two or three issues analysis assessments, one for each of the key areas: ethics, epistemology, and metaphysics. Students identify:

why the issue chosen is a philosophical issue

different responses to the philosophical issue

what position they will take in response to the philosophical issue

a justifiable defence for the position taken

how they will communicate this position to others.

Teachers negotiate with students the conditions under which this assessment type is assessed. The presentation may be written, oral, or in multimodal form and could include role plays, oral presentations, written arguments, scripted dialogues, multimedia presentations, responses to letters to the editor, films, or videos.

Presentations should be a maximum of 1500 words if written or a maximum of 10 minutes if oral, or the equivalent in multimodal form. At least one assessment should be presented in writing.

For this assessment type, students provide evidence of their learning primarily in relation to the following assessment design criteria:

knowledge and understanding

reasoning and argument

communication.

EXTERNAL ASSESSMENT

Assessment Type 3: Issues Study (30%)

Students undertake one issues study.

They examine a philosophical issue from any of the key areas, choosing the issue in negotiation with their teacher. Students consider the following questions:

Why is it a philosophical issue?

What positions do various philosophers hold?

What are the philosophers’ reasons for holding these positions?

What objections or counter examples are relevant to these positions?

What is the student’s own position, and why?

The issues study should be a maximum of 2000 words if written, a maximum of 12 minutes for an oral presentation, or the equivalent in multimodal form.

All specific features of the assessment design criteria for this subject are assessed in the issues study.

PERFORMANCE STANDARDS

The performance standards describe five levels of achievement, A to E.

Each level of achievement describes the knowledge, skills, and understanding that teachers and assessors refer to in deciding how well a student has demonstrated their learning on the basis of the evidence provided.

During the teaching and learning program the teacher gives students feedback on their learning, with reference to the performance standards.

At the student’s completion of study of each school assessment type, the teacher makes a decision about the quality of the student’s learning by:

referring to the performance standards

assigning a grade between A and E for the assessment type.

The student’s school assessment and external assessment are combined for a final result, which is reported as a grade between A and E.

Performance Standards for Stage 2 Philosophy

Knowledge   and  Understanding | Reasoning   and  Argument | Critical   Analysis | Communication
A | Consistently clear and   perceptive   knowledge   and   understanding   of   philosophical issues and   positions. In-depth and well-informed   understanding of reasons   and arguments used by   philosophers   on   issues   and   positions. | Insightful   and   coherent   explanation of the   philosophical   nature   of   issues and positions. Insightful and coherent   explanation   of   the   flow   of   logic and evidence of   arguments leading to   conclusions. Coherent and convincing   formulation   and   defence   of   positions   taken. | Perceptive   critical   analysis   of   strengths and weaknesses   of   philosophical   assumptions, positions, and   arguments. | Consistently clear, coherent,   and   fluent   communication   of   philosophical issues and   positions, with appropriate   conventions   consistently   observed. Accurate, consistent, and   discerning use of   philosophical   terminology,   with   appropriate   acknowledgment   of   sources.
B | Clear and thoughtful   knowledge   and   understanding   of   philosophical   issues   and   positions. Well-informed   understanding   of reasons and arguments   used by philosophers on   issues and positions. | Thoughtful and clear   explanation of the   philosophical   nature   of   issues and positions. Thoughtful and clear   explanation   of   the   flow   of   logic and evidence of   arguments leading to   conclusions. Convincing   formulation   and   defence  of positions taken. | Well-considered   critical   analysis of strengths and   weaknesses   of   philosophical   assumptions, positions, and   arguments. | Clear and coherent   communication   of   philosophical issues and   positions,   with   appropriate   conventions   mostly   observed. Mostly   accurate   and   relevant   use of philosophical   terminology,   with   appropriate   acknowledgment   of   sources.
C | Generally   clear   knowledge   and understanding of   philosophical issues and   positions. Informed understanding of   some reasons and   arguments used by   philosophers   on   issues   and   positions. | Considered   and   generally   clear explanation of the   philosophical nature of   issues and positions. Considered and generally   clear   explanation   of   the   flow   of logic and evidence of   arguments leading to   conclusions. Considered   formulation   and   defence  of positions taken. | Considered   analysis   of   some   strengths and weaknesses   of   philosophical   assumptions, positions, and   arguments. | Competent   communication   of   philosophical   issues   and   positions, with some   appropriate   conventions   observed. Generally appropriate use of   philosophical   terminology,   with mostly appropriate   acknowledgment   of   sources.
D | Some recognition and   awareness of a few   philosophical   issues   and   positions. Identification of some   reasons   or   arguments   used   by   philosophers   on   an   issue   and/or a position. | Partial or superficial   description of the   philosophical   nature   of   one   or more issues and/or   positions. Some   consideration   of   evidence   of   arguments   leading   to  conclusions. Partial formulation and   defence   of   positions   taken. | Some description of   strengths   and   weaknesses   of   philosophical   assumptions,   positions,   and/or   arguments. | Partial communication of   aspects of a philosophical   issue and/or position, with   inconsistent   use   of   a   limited   range of appropriate   conventions. Use of a limited range of   appropriate   philosophical   terminology, with some   acknowledgment   of   sources.

Knowledge and Understanding

Reasoning and Argument

Critical Analysis

Communication

A

Consistently clear and perceptive knowledge and understanding of philosophical issues and positions.

In-depth and well-informed understanding of reasons and arguments used by philosophers on issues and positions.

Insightful and coherent explanation of the philosophical nature of issues and positions.

Insightful and coherent explanation of the flow of logic and evidence of arguments leading to conclusions.

Coherent and convincing formulation and defence of positions taken.

Perceptive critical analysis of strengths and weaknesses of philosophical assumptions, positions, and arguments.

Consistently clear, coherent, and fluent communication of philosophical issues and positions, with appropriate conventions consistently observed.

Accurate, consistent, and discerning use of philosophical terminology, with appropriate acknowledgment of sources.

B

Clear and thoughtful knowledge and understanding of philosophical issues and positions.

Well-informed understanding of reasons and arguments used by philosophers on issues and positions.

Thoughtful and clear explanation of the philosophical nature of issues and positions.

Thoughtful and clear explanation of the flow of logic and evidence of arguments leading to conclusions.

Convincing formulation and defence of positions taken.

Well-considered critical analysis of strengths and weaknesses of philosophical assumptions, positions, and arguments.

Clear and coherent communication of philosophical issues and positions, with appropriate conventions mostly observed.

Mostly accurate and relevant use of philosophical terminology, with appropriate acknowledgment of sources.

C

Generally clear knowledge and understanding of philosophical issues and positions.

Informed understanding of some reasons and arguments used by philosophers on issues and positions.

Considered and generally clear explanation of the philosophical nature of issues and positions.

Considered and generally clear explanation of the flow of logic and evidence of arguments leading to conclusions.

Considered formulation and defence of positions taken.

Considered analysis of some strengths and weaknesses of philosophical assumptions, positions, and arguments.

Competent communication of philosophical issues and positions, with some appropriate conventions observed.

Generally appropriate use of philosophical terminology, with mostly appropriate acknowledgment of sources.

D

Some recognition and awareness of a few philosophical issues and positions.

Identification of some reasons or arguments used by philosophers on an issue and/or a position.

Partial or superficial description of the philosophical nature of one or more issues and/or positions.

Some consideration of evidence of arguments leading to conclusions.

Partial formulation and defence of positions taken.

Some description of strengths and weaknesses of philosophical assumptions, positions, and/or arguments.

Partial communication of aspects of a philosophical issue and/or position, with inconsistent use of a limited range of appropriate conventions.

Use of a limited range of appropriate philosophical terminology, with some acknowledgment of sources.

Knowledge   and  Understanding | Reasoning   and  Argument | Critical   Analysis | Communication
E | Emerging recognition of   what   is   philosophical   in   an   issue or position. Attempted identification of   elements of a reason or   argument used by a   philosopher   on   an   issue   or   a   position. | Attempted   description   of   the   nature of a philosophical   issue or position. Emerging   awareness   of   the   need to use evidence to   develop an argument or   position. Emerging   awareness   of   one   or   more   elements   of   a   good   argument. | Identification   of   a   strength   or   weakness of a philosophical   assumption, position, or   argument. | Attempted   communication   of an aspect of a   philosophical issue or   position. Limited use of any   philosophical   terminology,   with   limited   acknowledgment   of   sources.

Knowledge and Understanding

Reasoning and Argument

Critical Analysis

Communication

E

Emerging recognition of what is philosophical in an issue or position.

Attempted identification of elements of a reason or argument used by a philosopher on an issue or a position.

Attempted description of the nature of a philosophical issue or position.

Emerging awareness of the need to use evidence to develop an argument or position.

Emerging awareness of one or more elements of a good argument.

Identification of a strength or weakness of a philosophical assumption, position, or argument.

Attempted communication of an aspect of a philosophical issue or position.

Limited use of any philosophical terminology, with limited acknowledgment of sources.

ASSESSMENT INTEGRITY

The SACE Assuring Assessment Integrity Policy outlines the principles and processes that teachers and assessors follow to assure the integrity of student assessments. This policy is available on the SACE website (www.sace.sa.edu.au) as part of the SACE Policy Framework.

The SACE Board uses a range of quality assurance processes so that the grades awarded for student achievement, in both the school assessment and the external assessment, are applied consistently and fairly against the performance standards for a subject, and are comparable across all schools.

Information and guidelines on quality assurance in assessment at Stage 2 are available on the SACE website (www.sace.sa.edu.au).

SUPPORT MATERIALS

SUBJECT-SPECIFIC ADVICE

Online support materials are provided for each subject and updated regularly on the SACE website (www.sace.sa.edu.au). Examples of support materials are sample learning and assessment plans, annotated assessment tasks, annotated student responses, and recommended resource materials.

ADVICE ON ETHICAL STUDY AND RESEARCH

Advice for students and teachers on ethical study and research practices is available in the guidelines on the ethical conduct of research in the SACE on the SACE website (www.sace.sa.edu.au).