# THEORY PACK: Spontaneity


=== READING: Csikszentmihalyi — Flow: the psychology of optimal experience ===

THE ELEMENTS OF ENJOYMENT
The first surprise we encountered in our study was how similarly very
different activities were described when they were going especially well.
Apparently the way a long-distance swimmer felt when crossing the
English Channel was almost identical to the way a chess player felt during a
tournament or a climber progressing up a difficult rock face. All these
feelings were shared, in important respects, by subjects ranging from
musicians composing a new quartet to teenagers from the ghetto involved in
a championship basketball game.

    The second surprise was that, regardless of culture, stage of
modernization, social class, age, or gender, the respondents described
enjoyment in very much the same way. What they did to experience
enjoyment varied enormously—the elderly Koreans liked to meditate, the
teenage Japanese liked to swarm around in motorcycle gangs—but they
described how it felt when they enjoyed themselves in almost identical
terms. Moreover, the reasons the activity was enjoyed shared many more
similarities than differences. In sum, optimal experience, and the
psychological conditions that make it possible, seem to be the same the
world over.

    As our studies have suggested, the phenomenology of enjoyment has
eight major components. When people reflect on how it feels when their
experience is most positive, they mention at least one, and often all, of the
following. First, the experience usually occurs when we confront tasks we
have a chance of completing. Second, we must be able to concentrate on
what we are doing. Third and fourth, the concentration is usually possible
because the task undertaken has clear goals and provides immediate
feedback. Fifth, one acts with a deep but effortless involvement that
removes from awareness the worries and frustrations of everyday life.
Sixth, enjoyable experiences allow people to exercise a sense of control
over their actions. Seventh, concern for the self disappears, yet
paradoxically the sense of self emerges stronger after the flow experience is
over. Finally, the sense of the duration of time is altered; hours pass by in
minutes, and minutes can stretch out to seem like hours. The combination
of all these elements causes a sense of deep enjoyment that is so rewarding
people feel that expending a great deal of energy is worthwhile simply to be
able to feel it.

    We shall take a closer look at each of these elements so that we may
better understand what makes enjoyable activities so gratifying. With this
knowledge, it is possible to achieve control of consciousness and turn even
the most humdrum moments of everyday lives into events that help the self
grow.

    A Challenging Activity That Requires Skills

    Sometimes a person reports having an experience of extreme joy, a
feeling of ecstasy for no apparent good reason: a bar of haunting music may
trigger it, or a wonderful view, or even less—just a spontaneous sense of
well-being. But by far the overwhelming proportion of optimal experiences
are reported to occur within sequences of activities that are goal-directed
and bounded by rules—activities that require the investment of psychic
energy, and that could not be done without the appropriate skills. Why this
should be so will become clear as we go along; at this point it is sufficient
to note that this seems to be universally the case.

    It is important to clarify at the outset that an “activity” need not be
active in the physical sense, and the “skill” necessary to engage in it need
not be a physical skill. For instance, one of the most frequently mentioned
enjoyable activities the world over is reading. Reading is an activity
because it requires the concentration of attention and has a goal, and to do it
one must know the rules of written language. The skills involved in reading
include not only literacy but also the ability to translate words into images,
to empathize with fictional characters, to recognize historical and cultural
contexts, to anticipate turns of the plot, to criticize and evaluate the author’s
style, and so on. In this broader sense, any capacity to manipulate symbolic
information is a “skill,” such as the skill of the mathematician to shape
quantitative relationships in his head, or the skill of the musician in
combining musical notes.
    Another universally enjoyable activity is being with other people.
Socializing might at first sight appear to be an exception to the statement
that one needs to use skills to enjoy an activity, for it does not seem that
gossiping or joking around with another person requires particular abilities.
But of course, it does; as so many shy people know, if a person feels self-
conscious, he or she will dread establishing informal contacts, and avoid
company whenever possible.

    Any activity contains a bundle of opportunities for action, or
“challenges,” that require appropriate skills to realize. For those who don’t
have the right skills, the activity is not challenging; it is simply
meaningless. Setting up a chessboard gets the juices of a chess player
flowing, but leaves cold anyone who does not know the rules of the game.
To most people, the sheer wall of El Capitan in Yosemite valley is just a
huge chunk of featureless rock. But to the climber it is an arena offering an
endlessly complex symphony of mental and physical challenges.

     One simple way to find challenges is to enter a competitive situation.
Hence the great appeal of all games and sports that pit a person or team
against another. In many ways, competition is a quick way of developing
complexity: “He who wrestles with us,” wrote Edmund Burke, “strengthens
our nerves, and sharpens our skill. Our antagonist is our helper.” The
challenges of competition can be stimulating and enjoyable. But when
beating the opponent takes precedence in the mind over performing as well
as possible, enjoyment tends to disappear. Competition is enjoyable only
when it is a means to perfect one’s skills; when it becomes an end in itself,
it ceases to be fun.

    But challenges are by no means confined to competitive or to physical
activities. They are necessary to provide enjoyment even in situations where
one would not expect them to be relevant. For example, here is a quote
from one of our studies, of a statement made by an art expert describing the
enjoyment he takes in looking at a painting, something most people would
regard as an immediate, intuitive process: “A lot of pieces that you deal
with are very straightforward…and you don’t find anything exciting about
them, you know, but there are other pieces that have some sort of
challenge…. those are the pieces that stay in your mind, that are the most
interesting.” In other words, even the passive enjoyment one gets from
looking at a painting or sculpture depends on the challenges that the work
of art contains.

    Activities that provide enjoyment are often those that have been
designed for this very purpose. Games, sports, and artistic and literary
forms were developed over the centuries for the express purpose of
enriching life with enjoyable experiences. But it would be a mistake to
assume that only art and leisure can provide optimal experiences. In a
healthy culture, productive work and the necessary routines of everyday life
are also satisfying. In fact, one purpose of this book is to explore ways in
which even routine details can be transformed into personally meaningful
games that provide optimal experiences. Mowing the lawn or waiting in a
dentist’s office can become enjoyable provided one restructures the activity
by providing goals, rules, and the other elements of enjoyment to be
reviewed below.

     Heinz Maier-Leibnitz, the famous German experimental physicist and a
descendant of the eighteenth-century philosopher and mathematician,
provides an intriguing example of how one can take control of a boring
situation and turn it into a mildly enjoyable one. Professor Maier-Leibnitz
suffers from an occupational handicap common to academicians: having to
sit through endless, often boring conferences. To alleviate this burden he
invented a private activity that provides just enough challenges for him not
to be completely bored during a dull lecture, but is so automated that it
leaves enough attention free so that if something interesting is being said, it
will register in his awareness.

     What he does is this: Whenever a speaker begins to get tedious, he starts
to tap his right thumb once, then the third finger of the right hand, then the
index, then the fourth finger, then the third finger again, then the little finger
of the right hand. Then he moves to the left hand and taps the little finger,
the middle finger, the fourth finger, the index, and the middle finger again,
and ends with the thumb of the left hand. Then the right hand reverses the
sequence of fingering, followed by the reverse of the left hand’s sequence.
It turns out that by introducing full and half stops at regular intervals, there
are 888 combinations one can move through without repeating the same
pattern. By interspersing pauses among the taps at regular intervals, the
pattern acquires an almost musical harmony, and in fact it is easily
represented on a musical staff.

    After inventing this innocent game, Professor Maier-Leibnitz found an
interesting use for it: as a way of measuring the length of trains of thought.
The pattern of 888 taps, repeated three times, provides a set of 2,664 taps
that, with practice, takes almost exactly twelve minutes to perform. As soon
as he starts tapping, by shifting attention to his fingers, Professor Maier-
Leibnitz can tell exactly at what point he is in the sequence. So suppose that
a thought concerning one of his physics experiments appears in his
consciousness while he is tapping during a boring lecture. He immediately
shifts attention to his fingers, and registers the fact that he is at the 300th tap
of the second series; then in the same split second he returns to the train of
thought about the experiment. At a certain point the thought is completed,
and he has figured out the problem. How long did it take him to solve the
problem? By shifting attention back to his fingers, he notices that he is
about to finish the second series—the thought process has taken
approximately two and a quarter minutes to play itself out.

    Few people bother inventing quite such ingenious and complex
diversions to improve the quality of their experiences. But all of us have
more modest versions of the same. Everybody develops routines to fill in
the boring gaps of the day, or to bring experience back on an even keel
when anxiety threatens. Some people are compulsive doodlers, others chew
on things or smoke, smooth their hair, hum a tune, or engage in more
esoteric private rituals that have the same purpose: to impose order in
consciousness through the performance of patterned action. These are the
“microflow” activities that help us negotiate the doldrums of the day. But
how enjoyable an activity is depends ultimately on its complexity. The
small automatic games woven into the fabric of everyday life help reduce
boredom, but add little to the positive quality of experience. For that one
needs to face more demanding challenges, and use higher-level skills.

    In all the activities people in our study reported engaging in, enjoyment
comes at a very specific point: whenever the opportunities for action
perceived by the individual are equal to his or her capabilities. Playing
tennis, for instance, is not enjoyable if the two opponents are mismatched.
The less skilled player will feel anxious, and the better player will feel
bored. The same is true of every other activity: a piece of music that is too
simple relative to one’s listening skills will be boring, while music that is
too complex will be frustrating. Enjoyment appears at the boundary
between boredom and anxiety, when the challenges are just balanced with
the person’s capacity to act.

    The golden ratio between challenges and skills does not only hold true
for human activities. Whenever I took our hunting dog, Hussar, for a walk
in the open fields he liked to play a very simple game—the prototype of the
most culturally widespread game of human children, escape and pursuit. He
would run circles around me at top speed, with his tongue hanging out and
his eyes warily watching every move I made, daring me to catch him.
Occasionally I would take a lunge, and if I was lucky I got to touch him.
Now the interesting part is that whenever I was tired, and moved
halfheartedly, Hussar would run much tighter circles, making it relatively
easy for me to catch him; on the other hand, if I was in good shape and
willing to extend myself, he would enlarge the diameter of his circle. In this
way, the difficulty of the game was kept constant. With an uncanny sense
for the fine balancing of challenges and skills, he would make sure that the
game would yield the maximum of enjoyment for us both.

   The Merging of Action and Awareness

    When all a person’s relevant skills are needed to cope with the
challenges of a situation, that person’s attention is completely absorbed by
the activity. There is no excess psychic energy left over to process any
information but what the activity offers. All the attention is concentrated on
the relevant stimuli.

    As a result, one of the most universal and distinctive features of optimal
experience takes place: people become so involved in what they are doing
that the activity becomes spontaneous, almost automatic; they stop being
aware of themselves as separate from the actions they are performing.

   A dancer describes how it feels when a performance is going well:
“Your concentration is very complete. Your mind isn’t wandering, you are
not thinking of something else; you are totally involved in what you are
doing…. Your energy is flowing very smoothly. You feel relaxed,
comfortable, and energetic.”

    A rock climber explains how it feels when he is scaling a mountain:
“You are so involved in what you are doing [that] you aren’t thinking of
yourself as separate from the immediate activity…. You don’t see yourself
as separate from what you are doing.”

    A mother who enjoys the time spent with her small daughter: “Her
reading is the one thing that she’s really into, and we read together. She
reads to me, and I read to her, and that’s a time when I sort of lose touch
with the rest of the world, I’m totally absorbed in what I’m doing.”

    A chess player tells of playing in a tournament: “…the concentration is
like breathing—you never think of it. The roof could fall in and, if it missed
you, you would be unaware of it.”

    It is for this reason that we called the optimal experience “flow.” The
short and simple word describes well the sense of seemingly effortless
movement. The following words from a poet and rock climber apply to all
the thousands of interviews collected by us and by others over the years:
“The mystique of rock climbing is climbing; you get to the top of a rock
glad it’s over but really wish it would go on forever. The justification of
climbing is climbing, like the justification of poetry is writing; you don’t
conquer anything except things in yourself…. The act of writing justifies
poetry. Climbing is the same: recognizing that you are a flow. The purpose
of the flow is to keep on flowing, not looking for a peak or utopia but
staying in the flow. It is not a moving up but a continuous flowing; you
move up to keep the flow going. There is no possible reason for climbing
except the climbing itself; it is a self-communication.”

     Although the flow experience appears to be effortless, it is far from
being so. It often requires strenuous physical exertion, or highly disciplined
mental activity. It does not happen without the application of skilled
performance. Any lapse in concentration will erase it. And yet while it lasts
consciousness works smoothly, action follows action seamlessly. In normal
life, we keep interrupting what we do with doubts and questions. “Why am
I doing this? Should I perhaps be doing something else?” Repeatedly we
question the necessity of our actions, and evaluate critically the reasons for
carrying them out. But in flow there is no need to reflect, because the action
carries us forward as if by magic.

   Clear Goals and Feedback

    The reason it is possible to achieve such complete involvement in a
flow experience is that goals are usually clear, and feedback immediate. A
tennis player always knows what she has to do: return the ball into the
opponent’s court. And each time she hits the ball she knows whether she
has done well or not. The chess player’s goals are equally obvious: to mate
the opponent’s king before his own is mated. With each move, he can
calculate whether he has come closer to this objective. The climber inching
up a vertical wall of rock has a very simple goal in mind: to complete the
climb without falling. Every second, hour after hour, he receives
information that he is meeting that basic goal.

    Of course, if one chooses a trivial goal, success in it does not provide
enjoyment. If I set as my goal to remain alive while sitting on the living-
room sofa, I also could spend days knowing that I was achieving it, just as
the rock climber does. But this realization would not make me particularly
happy, whereas the climber’s knowledge brings exhilaration to his
dangerous ascent.

     Certain activities require a very long time to accomplish, yet the
components of goals and feedback are still extremely important to them.
One example was given by a sixty-two-year-old woman living in the Italian
Alps, who said her most enjoyable experiences were taking care of the cows
and tending the orchard: “I find special satisfaction in caring for the plants:
I like to see them grow day by day. It is very beautiful.” Although it
involves a period of patient waiting, seeing the plants one has cared for
grow provides a powerful feedback even in the urban apartments of
American cities.

     Another example is solo ocean cruising, in which a person alone might
sail for weeks in a small boat without seeing land. Jim Macbeth, who did a
study of flow in ocean cruising, comments on the excitement a sailor feels
when, after days of anxiously scanning the empty reaches of water, he
discerns the outline of the island he had been aiming for as it starts to rise
over the horizon. One of the legendary cruisers describes this sensation as
follows: “I…experienced a sense of satisfaction coupled with some
astonishment that my observations of the very distant sun from an unsteady
platform and the use of some simple tables…enable[d] a small island to be
found with certainty after an ocean crossing.” And another: “Each time, I
feel the same mixture of astonishment, love, and pride as this new land is
born which seems to have been created for me and by me.”

    The goals of an activity are not always as clear as those of tennis, and
the feedback is often more ambiguous than the simple “I am not falling”
information processed by the climber. A composer of music, for instance,
may know that he wishes to write a song, or a flute concerto, but other than
that, his goals are usually quite vague. And how does he know whether the
notes he is writing down are “right” or “wrong”? The same situation holds
true for the artist painting a picture, and for all activities that are creative or
open-ended in nature. But these are all exceptions that prove the rule: unless
a person learns to set goals and to recognize and gauge feedback in such
activities, she will not enjoy them.

    In some creative activities, where goals are not clearly set in advance, a
person must develop a strong personal sense of what she intends to do. The
artist might not have a visual image of what the finished painting should
look like, but when the picture has progressed to a certain point, she should
know whether this is what she wanted to achieve or not. And a painter who
enjoys painting must have internalized criteria for “good” or “bad” so that
after each brush stroke she can say: “Yes, this works; no, this doesn’t.”
Without such internal guidelines, it is impossible to experience flow.

    Sometimes the goals and the rules governing an activity are invented, or
negotiated on the spot. For example, teenagers enjoy impromptu
interactions in which they try to “gross each other out,” or tell tall stories, or
make fun of their teachers. The goal of such sessions emerges by trial and
error, and is rarely made explicit; often it remains below the participants’
level of awareness. Yet it is clear that these activities develop their own
rules and that those who take part have a clear idea of what constitutes a
successful “move,” and of who is doing well. In many ways this is the
pattern of a good jazz band, or any improvisational group. Scholars or
debaters obtain similar satisfaction when the “moves” in their arguments
mesh smoothly, and produce the desired result.

    What constitutes feedback varies considerably in different activities.
Some people are indifferent to things that others cannot get enough of. For
instance, surgeons who love doing operations claim that they wouldn’t
switch to internal medicine even if they were paid ten times as much as they
are for doing surgery, because an internist never knows exactly how well he
is doing. In an operation, on the other hand, the status of the patient is
almost always clear: as long as there is no blood in the incision, for
example, a specific procedure has been successful. When the diseased organ
is cut out, the surgeon’s task is accomplished; after that there is the suture
that gives a gratifying sense of closure to the activity. And the surgeon’s
disdain for psychiatry is even greater than that for internal medicine: to hear
surgeons talk, the psychiatrist might spend ten years with a patient without
knowing whether the cure is helping him.

    Yet the psychiatrist who enjoys his trade is also receiving constant
feedback: the way the patient holds himself, the expression on his face, the
hesitation in his voice, the content of the material he brings up in the
therapeutic hour—all these bits of information are important clues the
psychiatrist uses to monitor the progress of the therapy. The difference
between a surgeon and a psychiatrist is that the former considers blood and
excision the only feedback worth attending to, whereas the latter considers
the signals reflecting a patient’s state of mind to be significant information.
The surgeon judges the psychiatrist to be soft because he is interested in
such ephemeral goals; the psychiatrist thinks the surgeon crude for his
concentration on mechanics.

    The kind of feedback we work toward is in and of itself often
unimportant: What difference does it make if I hit the tennis ball between
the white lines, if I immobilize the enemy king on the chessboard, or if I
notice a glimmer of understanding in my patient’s eyes at the end of the
therapeutic hour? What makes this information valuable is the symbolic
message it contains: that I have succeeded in my goal. Such knowledge
creates order in consciousness, and strengthens the structure of the self.

    Almost any kind of feedback can be enjoyable, provided it is logically
related to a goal in which one has invested psychic energy. If I were to set
myself up to balance a walking stick on my nose, then the sight of the stick
wobbling upright above my face would provide a brief enjoyable interlude.
But each of us is temperamentally sensitive to a certain range of
information that we learn to value more than most other people do, and it is
likely that we will consider feedback involving that information to be more
relevant than others might.

    For instance, some people are born with exceptional sensitivity to
sound. They can discriminate among different tones and pitches, and
recognize and remember combinations of sounds better than the general
population. It is likely that such individuals will be attracted to playing with
sounds; they will learn to control and shape auditory information. For them
the most important feedback will consist in being able to combine sounds,
to produce or reproduce rhythms and melodies. Composers, singers,
performers, conductors, and music critics will develop from among them. In
contrast, some are genetically predisposed to be unusually sensitive to other
people, and they will learn to pay attention to the signals they send out. The
feedback they will be looking for is the expression of human emotion.
Some people have fragile selves that need constant reassurance, and for
them the only information that counts is winning in a competitive situation.
Others have invested so much in being liked that the only feedback they
take into account is approval and admiration.

    A good illustration of the importance of feedback is contained in the
responses of a group of blind religious women interviewed by Professor
Fausto Massimini’s team of psychologists in Milan, Italy. Like the other
respondents in our studies, they were asked to describe the most enjoyable
experiences in their lives. For these women, many of whom had been
sightless since birth, the most frequently mentioned flow experiences were
the result of reading books in Braille, praying, doing handicrafts like
knitting and binding books, and helping each other in case of sickness or
other need. Of the over six hundred people interviewed by the Italian team,
these blind women stressed more than anyone else the importance of
receiving clear feedback as a condition for enjoying whatever they were
doing. Unable to see what was going on around them, they needed to know
even more than sighted people whether what they were trying to accomplish
was actually coming to pass.

   Concentration on the Task at Hand

    One of the most frequently mentioned dimensions of the flow
experience is that, while it lasts, one is able to forget all the unpleasant
aspects of life. This feature of flow is an important by-product of the fact
that enjoyable activities require a complete focusing of attention on the task
at hand—thus leaving no room in the mind for irrelevant information.

    In normal everyday existence, we are the prey of thoughts and worries
intruding unwanted in consciousness. Because most jobs, and home life in
general, lack the pressing demands of flow experiences, concentration is
rarely so intense that preoccupations and anxieties can be automatically
ruled out. Consequently the ordinary state of mind involves unexpected and
frequent episodes of entropy interfering with the smooth run of psychic
energy. This is one reason why flow improves the quality of experience: the
clearly structured demands of the activity impose order, and exclude the
interference of disorder in consciousness.

    A professor of physics who was an avid rock climber described his state
of mind while climbing as follows: “It is as if my memory input has been
cut off. All I can remember is the last thirty seconds, and all I can think
ahead is the next five minutes.” In fact, any activity that requires
concentration has a similarly narrow window of time.

     But it is not only the temporal focus that counts. What is even more
significant is that only a very select range of information can be allowed
into awareness. Therefore all the troubling thoughts that ordinarily keep
passing through the mind are temporarily kept in abeyance. As a young
basketball player explains: “The court—that’s all that matters…. Sometimes
out on the court I think of a problem, like fighting with my steady girl, and I
think that’s nothing compared to the game. You can think about a problem
all day but as soon as you get in the game, the hell with it!” And another:
“Kids my age, they think a lot…but when you are playing basketball, that’s
all there is on your mind—just basketball…. Everything seems to follow
right along.”

   A mountaineer expands on the same theme: “When you’re [climbing]
you’re not aware of other problematic life situations. It becomes a world
unto its own, significant only to itself. It’s a concentration thing. Once
you’re into the situation, it’s incredibly real, and you’re very much in
charge of it. It becomes your total world.”

    A similar sensation is reported by a dancer: “I get a feeling that I don’t
get anywhere else…. I have more confidence in myself than any other time.
Maybe an effort to forget my problems. Dance is like therapy. If I am
troubled about something, I leave it out of the door as I go in [the dance
studio].”

    On a larger time scale, ocean cruising provides an equivalent merciful
oblivion: “But no matter how many little discomforts there may be at sea,
one’s real cares and worries seem to drop out of sight as the land slips
behind the horizon. Once we were at sea there was no point in worrying,
there was nothing we could do about our problems till we reached the next
port…. Life was, for a while, stripped of its artificialities; [other problems]
seemed quite unimportant compared with the state of the wind and the sea
and the length of the day’s run.”

    Edwin Moses, the great hurdler, has this to say in describing the
concentration necessary for a race: “Your mind has to be absolutely clear.
The fact that you have to cope with your opponent, jet lag, different foods,
sleeping in hotels, and personal problems has to be erased from
consciousness—as if they didn’t exist.”

   Although Moses was talking about what it takes to win world-class
sports events, he could have been describing the kind of concentration we
achieve when we enjoy any activity. The concentration of the flow
experience—together with clear goals and immediate feedback—provides
order to consciousness, inducing the enjoyable condition of psychic
negentropy.
    The Paradox of Control

    Enjoyment often occurs in games, sports, and other leisure activities
that are distinct from ordinary life, where any number of bad things can
happen. If a person loses a chess game or botches his hobby he need not
worry; in “real” life, however, a person who mishandles a business deal
may get fired, lose the mortgage on the house, and end up on public
assistance. Thus the flow experience is typically described as involving a
sense of control—or, more precisely, as lacking the sense of worry about
losing control that is typical in many situations of normal life.

    Here is how a dancer expresses this dimension of the flow experience:
“A strong relaxation and calmness comes over me. I have no worries of
failure. What a powerful and warm feeling it is! I want to expand, to hug
the world. I feel enormous power to effect something of grace and beauty.”
And a chess player: “…I have a general feeling of well-being, and that I am
in complete control of my world.”

    What these respondents are actually describing is the possibility, rather
than the actuality, of control. The ballet dancer may fall, break her leg, and
never make the perfect turn, and the chess player may be defeated and
never become a champion. But at least in principle, in the world of flow
perfection is attainable.

    This sense of control is also reported in enjoyable activities that involve
serious risks, activities that to an outsider would seem to be much more
potentially dangerous than the affairs of normal life. People who practice
hang gliding, spelunking, rock climbing, race-car driving, deep-sea diving,
and many similar sports for fun are purposefully placing themselves in
situations that lack the safety nets of civilized life. Yet all these individuals
report flow experiences in which a heightened sense of control plays an
important part.

    It is usual to explain the motivation of those who enjoy dangerous
activities as some sort of pathological need: they are trying to exorcise a
deep-seated fear, they are compensating, they are compulsively reenacting
an Oedipal fixation, they are “sensation seekers.” While such motives may
be occasionally involved, what is most striking, when one actually speaks to
specialists in risk, is how their enjoyment derives not from the danger itself,
but from their ability to minimize it. So rather than a pathological thrill that
comes from courting disaster, the positive emotion they enjoy is the
perfectly healthy feeling of being able to control potentially dangerous
forces.

    The important thing to realize here is that activities that produce flow
experiences, even the seemingly most risky ones, are so constructed as to
allow the practitioner to develop sufficient skills to reduce the margin of
error to as close to zero as possible. Rock climbers, for instance, recognize
two sets of dangers: “objective” and “subjective” ones. The first kind are
the unpredictable physical events that might confront a person on the
mountain: a sudden storm, an avalanche, a falling rock, a drastic drop in
temperature. One can prepare oneself against these threats, but they can
never be completely foreseen. Subjective dangers are those that arise from
the climber’s lack of skill—including the inability to estimate correctly the
difficulty of a climb in relation to one’s ability.

     The whole point of climbing is to avoid objective dangers as much as
possible, and to eliminate subjective dangers entirely by rigorous discipline
and sound preparation. As a result, climbers genuinely believe that climbing
the Matterhorn is safer than crossing a street in Manhattan, where the
objective dangers—taxi drivers, bicycle messengers, buses, muggers—are
far less predictable than those on the mountain, and where personal skills
have less chance to ensure the pedestrian’s safety.

    As this example illustrates, what people enjoy is not the sense of being
in control, but the sense of exercising control in difficult situations. It is not
possible to experience a feeling of control unless one is willing to give up
the safety of protective routines. Only when a doubtful outcome is at stake,
and one is able to influence that outcome, can a person really know whether
she is in control.

    One type of activity seems to constitute an exception. Games of chance
are enjoyable, yet by definition they are based on random outcomes
presumably not affected by personal skills. The spin of a roulette wheel or
the turn of a card in blackjack cannot be controlled by the player. In this
case, at least, the sense of control must be irrelevant to the experience of
enjoyment.

     The “objective” conditions, however, happen to be deceptive, for it is
actually the case that gamblers who enjoy games of hazard are subjectively
convinced that their skills do play a major role in the outcome. In fact, they
tend to stress the issue of control even more than practitioners of activities
where skills obviously allow greater control. Poker players are convinced it
is their ability, and not chance, that makes them win; if they lose they are
much more inclined to credit bad luck, but even in defeat they are willing to
look for a personal lapse to explain the outcome. Roulette players develop
elaborate systems to predict the turn of the wheel. In general, players of
games of chance often believe that they have the gift of seeing into the
future, at least within the restricted set of goals and rules that defines their
game. And this most ancient feeling of control—whose precursors include
the rituals of divination so prevalent in every culture—is one of the greatest
attractions the experience of gambling offers.

    This sense of being in a world where entropy is suspended explains in
part why flow-producing activities can become so addictive. Novelists have
often written on the theme of chess as a metaphor for escape from reality.
Vladimir Nabokov’s short story “The Luchin Defense” describes a young
chess genius so involved in the game that the rest of his life—his marriage,
his friendships, his livelihood—is going by the boards. Luchin tries to cope
with these problems, but he is unable to see them except in terms of chess
situations. His wife is the White Queen, standing on the fifth square of the
third file, threatened by the Black Bishop, who is Luchin’s agent—and so
forth. In trying to solve his personal conflicts Luchin turns to chess strategy,
and endeavors to invent the “Luchin defense,” a set of moves that will make
him invulnerable to outside attacks. As his relationships in real life
disintegrate, Luchin has a series of hallucinations in which the important
people around him become pieces on a huge chessboard, trying to
immobilize him. Finally he has a vision of the perfect defense against his
problems—and jumps out of the hotel window. Such stories about chess are
not so farfetched; many champions, including the first and the last great
American chess masters, Paul Morphy and Bobby Fischer, became so
comfortable with the beautifully clear-cut and logically ordered world of
chess that they turned their backs on the messy confusion of the “real”
world.

    The exhilaration gamblers feel in “figuring out” random chance is even
more notorious. Early ethnographers have described North American Plains
Indians so hypnotically involved in gambling with buffalo rib bones that
losers would often leave the tepee without clothes in the dead of winter,
having wagered away their weapons, horses, and wives as well. Almost any
enjoyable activity can become addictive, in the sense that instead of being a
conscious choice, it becomes a necessity that interferes with other activities.
Surgeons, for instance, describe operations as being addictive, “like taking
heroin.”

    When a person becomes so dependent on the ability to control an
enjoyable activity that he cannot pay attention to anything else, then he
loses the ultimate control: the freedom to determine the content of
consciousness. Thus enjoyable activities that produce flow have a
potentially negative aspect: while they are capable of improving the quality
of existence by creating order in the mind, they can become addictive, at
which point the self becomes captive of a certain kind of order, and is then
unwilling to cope with the ambiguities of life.

   The Loss of Self-Consciousness

    We have seen earlier that when an activity is thoroughly engrossing,
there is not enough attention left over to allow a person to consider either
the past or the future, or any other temporarily irrelevant stimuli. One item
that disappears from awareness deserves special mention, because in
normal life we spend so much time thinking about it: our own self. Here is a
climber describing this aspect of the experience: “It’s a Zen feeling, like
meditation or concentration. One thing you’re after is the one-pointedness
of mind. You can get your ego mixed up with climbing in all sorts of ways
and it isn’t necessarily enlightening. But when things become automatic, it’s
like an egoless thing, in a way. Somehow the right thing is done without
you ever thinking about it or doing anything at all…. It just happens. And
yet you’re more concentrated.” Or, in the words of a famous long-distance
ocean cruiser: “So one forgets oneself, one forgets everything, seeing only
the play of the boat with the sea, the play of the sea around the boat, leaving
aside everything not essential to that game….”

    The loss of the sense of a self separate from the world around it is
sometimes accompanied by a feeling of union with the environment,
whether it is the mountain, a team, or, in the case of this member of a
Japanese motorcycle gang, the “run” of hundreds of cycles roaring down
the streets of Kyoto: “I understand something, when all of our feelings get
tuned up. When running, we are not in complete harmony at the start. But if
the Run begins to go well, all of us, all of us feel for the others. How can I
say this?…When our minds become one. At such a time, it’s a real
pleasure…. When all of us become one, I understand something…. All of a
sudden I realize, ‘Oh, we’re one’ and think, ‘If we speed as fast as we can,
it will become a real Run.’…When we realize that we become one flesh, it’s
supreme. When we get high on speed. At such a moment, it’s really super.”

     This “becoming one flesh” so vividly described by the Japanese
teenager is a very real feature of the flow experience. Persons report feeling
it as concretely as they feel relief from hunger or from pain. It is a greatly
rewarding experience, but as we shall see later on, one that presents its own
dangers.

    Preoccupation with the self consumes psychic energy because in
everyday life we often feel threatened. Whenever we are threatened we
need to bring the image we have of ourselves back into awareness, so we
can find out whether or not the threat is serious, and how we should meet it.
For instance, if walking down the street I notice some people turning back
and looking at me with grins on their faces, the normal thing to do is
immediately to start worrying: “Is there something wrong? Do I look
funny? Is it the way I walk, or is my face smudged?” Hundreds of times
every day we are reminded of the vulnerability of our self. And every time
this happens psychic energy is lost trying to restore order to consciousness.

    But in flow there is no room for self-scrutiny. Because enjoyable
activities have clear goals, stable rules, and challenges well matched to
skills, there is little opportunity for the self to be threatened. When a
climber is making a difficult ascent, he is totally taken up in the
mountaineering role. He is 100 percent a climber, or he would not survive.
There is no way for anything or anybody to bring into question any other
aspect of his self. Whether his face is smudged makes absolutely no
difference. The only possible threat is the one that comes from the mountain
—but a good climber is well trained to face that threat, and does not need to
bring the self into play in the process.

     The absence of the self from consciousness does not mean that a person
in flow has given up the control of his psychic energy, or that she is
unaware of what happens in her body or in her mind. In fact the opposite is
usually true. When people first learn about the flow experience they
sometimes assume that lack of self-consciousness has something to do with
a passive obliteration of the self, a “going with the flow” Southern
California-style. But in fact the optimal experience involves a very active
role for the self. A violinist must be extremely aware of every movement of
her fingers, as well as of the sound entering her ears, and of the total form
of the piece she is playing, both analytically, note by note, and holistically,
in terms of its overall design. A good runner is usually aware of every
relevant muscle in his body, of the rhythm of his breathing, as well as of the
performance of his competitors within the overall strategy of the race. A
chess player could not enjoy the game if he were unable to retrieve from his
memory, at will, previous positions, past combinations.

    So loss of self-consciousness does not involve a loss of self, and
certainly not a loss of consciousness, but rather, only a loss of
consciousness of the self. What slips below the threshold of awareness is
the concept of self, the information we use to represent to ourselves who we
are. And being able to forget temporarily who we are seems to be very
enjoyable. When not preoccupied with our selves, we actually have a
chance to expand the concept of who we are. Loss of self-consciousness can
lead to self-transcendence, to a feeling that the boundaries of our being have
been pushed forward.

    This feeling is not just a fancy of the imagination, but is based on a
concrete experience of close interaction with some Other, an interaction that
produces a rare sense of unity with these usually foreign entities. During the
long watches of the night the solitary sailor begins to feel that the boat is an
extension of himself, moving to the same rhythms toward a common goal.
The violinist, wrapped in the stream of sound she helps to create, feels as if
she is part of the “harmony of the spheres.” The climber, focusing all her
attention on the small irregularities of the rock wall that will have to support
her weight safely, speaks of the sense of kinship that develops between
fingers and rock, between the frail body and the context of stone, sky, and
wind. In a chess tournament, players whose attention has been riveted, for
hours, to the logical battle on the board claim that they feel as if they have
been merged into a powerful “field of force” clashing with other forces in
some nonmaterial dimension of existence. Surgeons say that during a
difficult operation they have the sensation that the entire operating team is a
single organism, moved by the same purpose; they describe it as a “ballet”
in which the individual is subordinated to the group performance, and all
involved share in a feeling of harmony and power.

     One could treat these testimonials as poetic metaphors and leave them
at that. But it is important to realize that they refer to experiences that are
just as real as being hungry, or as concrete as bumping into a wall. There is
nothing mysterious or mystical about them. When a person invests all her
psychic energy into an interaction—whether it is with another person, a
boat, a mountain, or a piece of music—she in effect becomes part of a
system of action greater than what the individual self had been before. This
system takes its form from the rules of the activity; its energy comes from
the person’s attention. But it is a real system—subjectively as real as being
part of a family, a corporation, or a team—and the self that is part of it
expands its boundaries and becomes more complex than what it had been.

    This growth of the self occurs only if the interaction is an enjoyable
one, that is, if it offers nontrivial opportunities for action and requires a
constant perfection of skills. It is also possible to lose oneself in systems of
action that demand nothing but faith and allegiance. Fundamentalist
religions, mass movements, and extremist political parties also offer
opportunities for self-transcendence that millions are eager to accept. They
also provide a welcome extension of the boundaries of the self, a feeling
that one is involved in something great and powerful. The true believer also
becomes part of the system in concrete terms, because his psychic energy
will be focused and shaped by the goals and rules of his belief. But the true
believer is not really interacting with the belief system; he usually lets his
psychic energy be absorbed by it. From this submission nothing new can
come; consciousness may attain a welcome order, but it will be an order
imposed rather than achieved. At best the self of the true believer resembles
a crystal: strong and beautifully symmetrical, but very slow to grow.

    There is one very important and at first apparently paradoxical
relationship between losing the sense of self in a flow experience, and
having it emerge stronger afterward. It almost seems that occasionally
giving up self-consciousness is necessary for building a strong self-concept.
Why this should be so is fairly clear. In flow a person is challenged to do
her best, and must constantly improve her skills. At the time, she doesn’t
have the opportunity to reflect on what this means in terms of the self—if
she did allow herself to become self-conscious, the experience could not
have been very deep. But afterward, when the activity is over and self-
consciousness has a chance to resume, the self that the person reflects upon
is not the same self that existed before the flow experience: it is now
enriched by new skills and fresh achievements.

    The Transformation of Time

    One of the most common descriptions of optimal experience is that time
no longer seems to pass the way it ordinarily does. The objective, external
duration we measure with reference to outside events like night and day, or
the orderly progression of clocks, is rendered irrelevant by the rhythms
dictated by the activity. Often hours seem to pass by in minutes; in general,
most people report that time seems to pass much faster. But occasionally the
reverse occurs: Ballet dancers describe how a difficult turn that takes less
than a second in real time stretches out for what seems like minutes: “Two
things happen. One is that it seems to pass really fast in one sense. After it’s
passed, it seems to have passed really fast. I see that it’s 1:00 in the
morning, and I say: ‘Aha, just a few minutes ago it was 8:00.’ But then
while I’m dancing…it seems like it’s been much longer than maybe it really
was.” The safest generalization to make about this phenomenon is to say
that during the flow experience the sense of time bears little relation to the
passage of time as measured by the absolute convention of the clock.
    But here, too, there are exceptions that prove the rule. An outstanding
open-heart surgeon who derives a deep enjoyment from his work is well
known for his ability to tell the exact time during an operation with only
half a minute margin of error, without consulting a watch. But in his case
timing is one of the essential challenges of the job: since he is called only to
do a very small but extremely difficult part of the operation, he is usually
involved in several operations simultaneously, and has to walk from one
case to the next, making sure that he is not holding up his colleagues
responsible for the preliminary phases. A similar skill is often found among
practitioners of other activities where time is of the essence, for instance,
runners and racers. In order to pace themselves precisely in a competition,
they have to be very sensitive to the passage of seconds and minutes. In
such cases the ability to keep track of time becomes one of the skills
necessary to do well in the activity, and thus it contributes to, rather than
detracts from, the enjoyment of the experience.

    But most flow activities do not depend on clock time; like baseball, they
have their own pace, their own sequences of events marking transitions
from one state to another without regard to equal intervals of duration. It is
not clear whether this dimension of flow is just an epiphenomenon—a by-
product of the intense concentration required for the activity at hand—or
whether it is something that contributes in its own right to the positive
quality of the experience. Although it seems likely that losing track of the
clock is not one of the major elements of enjoyment, freedom from the
tyranny of time does add to the exhilaration we feel during a state of
complete involvement.
THE AUTOTELIC EXPERIENCE
The key element of an optimal experience is that it is an end in itself. Even
if initially undertaken for other reasons, the activity that consumes us
becomes intrinsically rewarding. Surgeons speak of their work: “It is so
enjoyable that I would do it even if I didn’t have to.” Sailors say: “I am
spending a lot of money and time on this boat, but it is worth it—nothing
quite compares with the feeling I get when I am out sailing.”

    The term “autotelic” derives from two Greek words, auto meaning self,
and telos meaning goal. It refers to a self-contained activity, one that is done
not with the expectation of some future benefit, but simply because the
doing itself is the reward. Playing the stock market in order to make money
is not an autotelic experience; but playing it in order to prove one’s skill at
foretelling future trends is—even though the outcome in terms of dollars
and cents is exactly the same. Teaching children in order to turn them into
good citizens is not autotelic, whereas teaching them because one enjoys
interacting with children is. What transpires in the two situations is
ostensibly identical; what differs is that when the experience is autotelic, the
person is paying attention to the activity for its own sake; when it is not, the
attention is focused on its consequences.

    Most things we do are neither purely autotelic nor purely exotelic (as
we shall call activities done for external reasons only), but are a
combination of the two. Surgeons usually enter into their long period of
training because of exotelic expectations: to help people, to make money, to
achieve prestige. If they are lucky, after a while they begin to enjoy their
work, and then surgery becomes to a large extent also autotelic.

    Some things we are initially forced to do against our will turn out in the
course of time to be intrinsically rewarding. A friend of mine, with whom I
worked in an office many years ago, had a great gift. Whenever the work
got to be particularly boring, he would look up with a glazed look in his
half-closed eyes, and he would start to hum a piece of music—a Bach
chorale, a Mozart concerto, a Beethoven symphony. But humming is a
pitifully inadequate description of what he did. He reproduced the entire
piece, imitating with his voice the principal instruments involved in the
particular passage: now he wailed like a violin, now he crooned like a
bassoon, now he blared like a baroque trumpet. We in the office listened
entranced, and resumed work refreshed. What is curious is the way my
friend had developed this gift. Since the age of three, he had been taken by
his father to concerts of classical music. He remembers having been
unspeakably bored, and occasionally falling asleep in the seat, to be
awakened by a sharp slap. He grew to hate concerts, classical music, and
presumably his father—but year after year he was forced to repeat this
painful experience. Then one evening, when he was about seven years old,
during the overture to a Mozart opera, he had what he described as an
ecstatic insight: he suddenly discerned the melodic structure of the piece,
and had an overwhelming sense of a new world opening up before him. It
was the three years of painful listening that had prepared him for this
epiphany, years during which his musical skills had developed, however
unconsciously, and made it possible for him to understand the challenge
Mozart had built into the music.

    Of course he was lucky; many children never reach the point of
recognizing the possibilities of the activity into which they are forced, and
end up disliking it forever. How many children have come to hate classical
music because their parents forced them to practice an instrument? Often
children—and adults—need external incentives to take the first steps in an
activity that requires a difficult restructuring of attention. Most enjoyable
activities are not natural; they demand an effort that initially one is reluctant
to make. But once the interaction starts to provide feedback to the person’s
skills, it usually begins to be intrinsically rewarding.

    An autotelic experience is very different from the feelings we typically
have in the course of life. So much of what we ordinarily do has no value in
itself, and we do it only because we have to do it, or because we expect
some future benefit from it. Many people feel that the time they spend at
work is essentially wasted—they are alienated from it, and the psychic
energy invested in the job does nothing to strengthen their self. For quite a
few people free time is also wasted. Leisure provides a relaxing respite
from work, but it generally consists of passively absorbing information,
without using any skills or exploring new opportunities for action. As a
result life passes in a sequence of boring and anxious experiences over
which a person has little control.

    The autotelic experience, or flow, lifts the course of life to a different
level. Alienation gives way to involvement, enjoyment replaces boredom,
helplessness turns into a feeling of control, and psychic energy works to
reinforce the sense of self, instead of being lost in the service of external
goals. When experience is intrinsically rewarding life is justified in the
present, instead of being held hostage to a hypothetical future gain.

    But, as we have already seen in the section dealing with the sense of
control, one must be aware of the potentially addictive power of flow. We
should reconcile ourselves to the fact that nothing in the world is entirely
positive; every power can be misused. Love may lead to cruelty, science can
create destruction, technology unchecked produces pollution. Optimal
experience is a form of energy, and energy can be used either to help or to
destroy. Fire warms or burns; atomic energy can generate electricity or it
can obliterate the world. Energy is power, but power is only a means. The
goals to which it is applied can make life either richer or more painful.

    The Marquis de Sade perfected the infliction of pain into a form of
pleasure, and in fact, cruelty is a universal source of enjoyment for people
who have not developed more sophisticated skills. Even in societies that are
called “civilized” because they try to make life enjoyable without
interfering with anyone’s well-being, people are attracted to violence.
Gladiatorial combat amused the Romans, Victorians paid money to see rats
being torn up by terriers, Spaniards approach the killing of bulls with
reverence, and boxing is a staple of our own culture.

    Veterans from Vietnam or other wars sometimes speak with nostalgia
about front-line action, describing it as a flow experience. When you sit in a
trench next to a rocket launcher, life is focused very clearly: the goal is to
destroy the enemy before he destroys you; good and bad become self-
evident; the means of control are at hand; distractions are eliminated. Even
if one hates war, the experience can be more exhilarating than anything
encountered in civilian life.
    Criminals often say things such as, “If you showed me something I can
do that’s as much fun as breaking into a house at night, and lifting the
jewelry without waking anyone up, I would do it.” Much of what we label
juvenile delinquency—car theft, vandalism, rowdy behavior in general—is
motivated by the same need to have flow experiences not available in
ordinary life. As long as a significant segment of society has few
opportunities to encounter meaningful challenges, and few chances to
develop the skills necessary to benefit from them, we must expect that
violence and crime will attract those who cannot find their way to more
complex autotelic experiences.

    This issue becomes even more complicated when we reflect that
respected scientific and technological activities, which later assume a
highly ambiguous and perhaps even horrifying aspect, are originally very
enjoyable. Robert Oppenheimer called his work on the atomic bomb a
“sweet problem,” and there is no question that the manufacture of nerve gas
or the planning of Star Wars can be deeply engrossing to those involved in
them.

    The flow experience, like everything else, is not “good” in an absolute
sense. It is good only in that it has the potential to make life more rich,
intense, and meaningful; it is good because it increases the strength and
complexity of the self. But whether the consequence of any particular
instance of flow is good in a larger sense needs to be discussed and
evaluated in terms of more inclusive social criteria. The same is true,
however, of all human activities, whether science, religion, or politics. A
particular religious belief may benefit a person or a group, but repress many
others. Christianity helped to integrate the decaying ethnic communities of
the Roman Empire, but it was instrumental in dissolving many cultures with
which it later came into contact. A given scientific advance may be good
for science and a few scientists, but bad for humanity as a whole. It is an
illusion to believe that any solution is beneficial for all people and all times;
no human achievement can be taken as the final word. Jefferson’s
uncomfortable dictum “Eternal vigilance is the price of liberty” applies
outside the fields of politics as well; it means that we must constantly
reevaluate what we do, lest habits and past wisdom blind us to new
possibilities.
    It would be senseless, however, to ignore a source of energy because it
can be misused. If mankind had tried to ban fire because it could be used to
burn things down, we would not have grown to be very different from the
great apes. As Democritus said so simply many centuries ago: “Water can
be both good and bad, useful and dangerous. To the danger, however, a
remedy has been found: learning to swim.” To swim in this case involves
learning to distinguish the useful and the harmful forms of flow, and then
making the most of the former while placing limits on the latter. The task is
to learn how to enjoy everyday life without diminishing other people’s
chances to enjoy theirs.


=== READING: Slingerland — Wu Wei as Conceptual Metaphor ===

Chapter 1




            Wu-wei a s Conceptual Metaphor

B    efore elucidatin g the conceptual structur e of wu-wei as metaphor, I will first
     explain what is meant by "conceptual metaphor, " an d this will require a brief
introduction to a subfield o f cognitive linguistics l concerne d wit h metaphor the -
ory.



The Contemporary Theor y o f Metapho r

Contemporary metapho r theor y i s perhaps mos t familia r t o the general academi c
public throug h th e work s o f Georg e Lakof f an d Mar k Johnson , wh o se e them -
selves a s being engage d i n a kind of "descriptiv e o r empirical phenomenology "
aimed a t sketching out a "geography o f human experience" (Johnso n 1987 : xxx -
viii). On e of th e basic tenet s o f the contemporary approac h t o metaphor i s that
human cognition—the production, communication, an d processing o f meaning—
is heavil y dependen t upo n mapping s between domains , wit h "mapping " under -
stood a s "a correspondence betwee n two set s that assigns to each element i n the
first a counterpar t i n th e second " (Fauconnie r 1997:1 ) Anothe r tene t i s that th e
process o f human cognition is independent of language, and that linguistic mani-
festations o f cross-domain mappings are merely manifestations of deepe r cogni -
tive processes. 3 Thes e mapping s tak e severa l forms , bu t perhap s th e mos t
dramatic form—an d th e for m I will be primaril y concerned wit h here—is wha t
Fauconnier refer s t o as "projection mappings " (1997 : 9) , where part of the struc-
ture of a more concrete o r clearly organize d domai n (th e source domain) is used
to understand and talk about another , usuall y more abstrac t o r less clearl y struc -
tured, domain (th e target domain). It is this sort of projective mapping that I will
refer t o as "metaphor," which—understood in this way—encompasses simile and
analogy a s well as metaphor in the more specific , literar y sense.
      Our primar y an d mos t highl y structure d experienc e i s wit h th e physica l
realm, an d the patterns tha t we encounter an d develop throug h the interaction of
our bodies wit h the physical environment therefore serve as our most basic sourc e
domains. These sourc e domain s ar e then calle d upo n t o provide structur e when
our attention turn s to the abstract realm . Probably th e most crucial claim of cog -
nitive linguistics is thus that sensorimotor structures play a crucial role in shapin g

                                           21
22    Effortless   Action


our concept s an d mode s o f reasoning. 4 Th e mos t basi c o f thes e structure s ar e
referred t o a s "primar y schemas"—"dynami c analo g representation s o f spatia l
relations and movements in space" (Gibbs and Colston 1995 : 349)—that come to
be associate d wit h abstrac t targe t domain s throug h experientia l correlation ,
resulting in a set of "primary metaphors. " Lakof f an d Johnson 1999 : 50-54 pro-
vide a short list of representative primary metaphors (derive d fro m Grad y 1997)
such as AFFECTIO N I S WARMTH,5 IMPORTANT IS BIG, MORE IS UP, and s o on , spec -
ifying thei r sensorimotor sourc e domains and the primary experience correlation s
that give rise to them. Two examples that I will invoke are as follows:
     1. PURPOSES AR E DESTINATIONS
     Subjective Judgement: achieving a purpose
     Sensorimotor Experience : reachin g a destination
     Example: "He'll ultimately be successful, but he isn't there yet."
     Primary Experience: reachin g a destination i n everyday life and thereby
         achieving a purpose (e.g. , if you want a drink, yo u need t o go to the
         water cooler)

     2. ACTION S ARE SELF-PROPELLED MOTION S
     Subjective Judgement: action
     Sensorimotor Experience : moving one's body through spac e
     Example: "I'm moving right along on the project "
     Primary Experience : commo n actio n o f movin g oneself throug h spac e
         (Lakoff an d Johnson 1999: 52-53).
It is important to note that schemas understood i n this way are based upon experi -
ential correlation, rathe r than pre-existing similarity, 6 and that they represent ana-
log o r imag e "irreducibl e gestal t structures " (Johnso n 1987 : 44)—including
entities, properties , an d relations—rathe r tha n propositions . Thus , th e phras e
PURPOSES ARE DESTINATIONS should be see n a s a shorthand way t o refer t o "the
complex web of connections i n our experience an d understanding formed by this
mapping across domains of experience" (Johnso n 1987: 7 ) rather than a preposi-
tional statement; "the metaphor itself is not reducible to the proposition w e use to
name it" (Johnson 1987: 7).
      Traditional theorie s o f metapho r usuall y portra y i t a s a relativel y rar e an d
somewhat "deviant " mod e o f communicatio n throw n in t o ad d rhetorical spice ,
but fully reducibl e t o some equivalent literal paraphrase. Metaphor understoo d in
this wa y i s thu s a purel y optiona l linguisti c device. A n importan t claim o f th e
cognitive approach t o metaphor is that metaphor is , in fact, primaril y a matter of
thought, no t language, and that conceptual metapho r i s ubiquitous and unavoid-
able fo r creature s lik e us. 7 Conceptua l metaphor , i t is claimed, serve s a s one of
our primary tools fo r reasoning about ourselves and the world—especially about
relatively abstrac t o r unstructure d domains . Whil e abstrac t concept s suc h a s
"time" or "death" may hav e a skeleto n structur e that is directly (i.e. , non-meta-
phorically) represente d conceptually , i n most cases thi s structur e i s no t ric h o r
detailed enoug h t o allo w u s t o mak e usefu l inferences . Therefore , whe n w e
attempt t o conceptualiz e an d reaso n abou t abstrac t o r relativel y unstructured
                                                Wu-wei as Conceptual Metaphor             23

realms, thi s skeleto n structur e i s fleshed out (usuall y automaticall y an d uncon -
sciously) wit h additiona l structur e provided b y th e primar y metaphor s derive d
from basi c bodil y experience , ofte n invoke d i n combination wit h other primar y
schemas t o for m comple x metaphor s o r conceptua l blends. 8 Whe n primar y o r
complex sourc e domains ar e activated i n such cases an d mapped ont o the targe t
domain, most aspect s of the source domain conceptua l topology—tha t is , infer -
ence patterns, imagisti c reasoning pattern, salien t entities, and so forth—are pre-
served, thereb y importin g a hig h degre e o f structur e int o th e targe t domain .
Lakoff ha s referred to this as the "invariance principle" (Lakof f 1990) .
      To give an illustration of this process, conside r the question of how we are to
comprehend an d reaso n abou t somethin g a s abstract , fo r instance , a s "life. "
Lakoff an d Johnso n (1999 : 60-62 ) not e that , whe n reasonin g o r talkin g about
life, Englis h speakers ofte n invok e the comple x metaphor , PURPOSEFU L LIF E AS
JOURNEY, which provides the m with a schema drawn from embodie d experienc e
that helps them to reason abou t this abstract concept. Thi s schema derives from a
folk belief 10 that it is important t o have a purpose i n life , an d i s based upo n the
two primar y metaphor s mentione d above , PURPOSE S AR E DESTINATIONS an d
ACTIONS AR E SELF-PROPELLED MOTIONS—tw o schemas that have become a part
of our conceptual "toolbox" through experiential correlation. When these two pri-
mary metaphor s ar e combine d wit h the simpl e fac t (derive d fro m ou r commo n
knowledge of the world ) that a long trip to a series o f destinations constitute s a
journey, we hav e the comple x metaphor schema, PURPOSEFU L LIFE AS JOURNEY,
which Lakoff and Johnson map as follows:
      Journey —            > Purposefu l Life
      Traveler —           > Perso n Living a Life
      Destinations —       > Lif e Goals
      Itinerary —          > Lif e Plan

The PURPOSEFU L LIF E AS JOURNEY metaphor thus arises out o f ou r basi c embod -
ied experienc e an d give s u s a wa y t o thin k an d reaso n abou t thi s abstrac t
"entity," whic h "in itself i s fairly unstructure d and therefore difficult t o reason
about. As Lakoff an d Johnson note, th e ful l practica l import of a metaphor such
as thi s lies i n it s entailments : tha t is, th e fac t that the metaphori c lin k betwee n
abstract life and a concrete journey allow s u s t o dra w upo n ou r larg e stoc k o f
commonplace knowledg e abou t journeys an d appl y thi s knowledge to "life. "
So, to return to their example, we have in our stock of experience concernin g lit-
eral journeys some of the following pieces o f knowledge:
     A journey requires planning a route to a destination.
     Journeys may have obstacles, an d you should try to anticipate them.
     You should provide yourself with what you need for your journey.
     As a prudent traveler, you should have an itinerary indicating where you
        are supposed to be at what times and where to go to next.
24    Effortless Action

     You should always know where yo u ar e an d where you ar e going next,
       and how to get to your next destination. (62 )
Mapping this knowledge and set of inference patterns onto th e abstract real m of
"life," we get the following entailments:
     A purposefu l lif e require s plannin g a mean s fo r achievin g you r pur -
        poses.
     Purposeful live s ma y hav e difficulties, an d you shoul d tr y t o anticipat e
        them.
     You should provide yoursel f wit h what you need t o pursue a purposeful
        life.
     As a prudent person wit h lif e goals, you should have an overall life plan
        indicating what goals you are supposed t o achieve at what times and
        what goal to seek to achieve next.
     You should alway s kno w what you hav e achieved s o far an d wha t you
        are going to achieve next, and how to go about achieving these goals .
        (62)
We thus unconsciously assume that life, like a physical journey, requires planning
if on e i s t o reac h one' s "destination, " tha t difficultie s wil l b e "encountered "
"along th e way, " tha t on e shoul d avoi d bein g "sidetracked " or "bogge d down, "
and s o on . Havin g becom e convince d tha t I hav e becom e "side-tracked, " fo r
instance, I unconsciousl y impor t reasonin g structure s fro m th e sourc e domai n
and project them on the target domain: exertin g more effor t (travelin g farther) in
my current endeavo r (path ) will only make things worse (lead m e father astray) ;
if I wish things to improve (ge t back on track), it wil l be necessary t o first radi-
cally chang e m y curren t manne r o f doin g thing s (backtrack , reverse ) unti l they
resemble th e manner in which I used t o do things a t some particula r tim e i n the
past (ge t back t o the "point" where I went astray), and then begin making effor t
again (begin moving forward) in a very different manne r than I am doing now (in
a new direction). W e can thus see how a single complex metapho r ca n have pro-
found practica l implications , influencin g decision making an d providing us with
normative guidance . I n addition , th e shee r awkwardnes s of th e (mostly ) litera l
paraphrases just give n illustrat e ho w deepl y th e PURPOSEFU L LIFE AS JOURNEY
schema penetrate s ou r consciousness : i t take s a grea t dea l o f effor t t o avoi d
invoking it in some way when discussing life-decisions .
      As w e ca n se e fro m thi s example , a singl e complex , conceptua l metapho r
 structure ca n infor m a whol e serie s o f specifi c linguisti c expressions , suc h a s
being "lost " i n life , workin g a t a "dead-end " job, o r "goin g nowhere. " Thes e
 "families" o f specifi c metaphorica l expression s (whethe r linguisti c o r material )
 are not random or unrelated but are rather all motivated by a common conceptua l
 schema. This , indeed , is a crucial proposition o f cognitive linguistics : tha t meta-
phorical expression s ar e not simply fixed, linguistic conventions but rather repre -
 sent th e surfac e manifestation s o f deeper , active , an d largel y unconsciou s
 conceptual structures . Thi s mean s tha t a metaphoric structur e such a s PURPOSE -
 FUL LIFE AS JOURNEY exists independently of an y specifi c metaphoric expressio n
                                                Wu-wei as Conceptual Metaphor             25

of it , and ca n thu s continuously generate ne w and unforesee n expressions . Any-
one familia r with the PURPOSEFU L LIF E A S JOURNEY schema ca n instantl y grasp
the sense o f such metaphors as "dead-end job " o r "going nowhere " upo n hearing
them for the first time, an d can also dra w upon th e conceptual schem a t o creat e
related bu t entirel y nove l metaphori c expressions . Whe n th e nove l expressio n
"living in the fast lane" was introduced int o American culture, it was immediately
comprehensible becaus e i t i s base d upo n th e PURPOSEFU L LIF E A S JOURNEY
schema, an d becam e popula r becaus e i t allowe d American s t o dra w upo n a
wealth o f reasoning pattern s abou t a concrete sourc e domai n (drivin g in the fas t
lane of the freeway, whic h is exciting but potentially dangerous) an d use them to
reason abou t lif e (you r frien d wh o i s "livin g i n th e fas t lane " may b e havin g a
good tim e a t th e moment , bu t ther e i s a potentia l fo r disaster , s o mayb e sh e
should "slow down" before she "crashes and burns").
      Scholars studyin g metaphor fro m a cognitive perspective cit e severa l type s
of phenomen a a s evidence tha t metaphors i n fac t represen t conceptuall y active ,
dynamic structures . Th e expressio n "livin g i n th e fas t lane " i s a n exampl e o f
"novel-case generalization " evidence : th e fac t tha t entirel y nove l linguisti c
expressions ca n b e generate d tha t are nonetheles s instantl y comprehended b y a
competent speaker , becaus e the y dra w upo n a share d conceptua l structure .
Related evidenc e include s polysem y (the fact tha t we find systematically related
meanings for single words or expressions such as "dead end" o r "lost") and infer-
ence patterns—tha t is , th e fac t tha t reasonin g pattern s fro m well-structure d
source domain s (physica l travel, fo r instance ) ar e commonly use d t o draw con -
clusions abou t abstrac t targe t domain s (e.g. , life) . I n additio n t o suc h linguistic
evidence, a growin g bod y o f psychological experiment s have demonstrate d th e
cognitive reality of metaphor schema s as manifested in such processes a s sensory
perception,13 and several studie s have provided evidence that cognitive mappings
are actually physiologically instantiated in the brain.14 All of this convergent evi-
dence suggest s tha t conceptual metaphor is not only a very real phenomenon but
is an inevitable part of embodied huma n cognition.
      This lead s u s t o th e "experiential realist " o r "embodie d realist " stance tha t
informs th e cognitive linguistic approach. Conceptual metaphor s "ar e interactiv e
. . . structured mode s o f understanding " tha t aris e a s a result o f ou r embodie d
mind having to adapt to "our physical , cultural, and interpersonal environments "
(Fesmire 1994 : 152) . Because human bodies ar e quite similar the world over, and
the types o f environments huma n beings fac e are als o share d i n most important
respects, on e would expect t o find a high degree o f similarity with regard to con-
ceptual metaphor s acros s huma n cultures an d languages, especially wit h regar d
to primary metaphor. For instance, it is not unreasonable t o claim that all human
beings—regardless of culture, language, or period i n history—have had the expe -
rience of needing to move from point A to point B in order realize som e purpose ,
and w e should thus not be surprise d i f the primary metaphor PURPOSE S AR E DES-
TINATIONS i s universal or near-universal amon g human cultures. I n other words ,
since huma n experienc e involve s a hug e numbe r o f shared , embodie d gestal t
structures, w e shoul d expec t thes e share d structures—a s a resul t o f projectiv e
mapping—to be reflected at the level of abstract thought as well.
26    Effortless Action

     Of course , sinc e thes e gestal t pattern s aris e throug h th e interaction s o f ou r
embodied mind s wit h ou r environment , w e woul d als o expec t tha t dramati c
changes i n environmen t would be reflecte d i n the creatio n o f nove l conceptua l
metaphors. T o a certai n degre e w e se e thi s happe n wit h th e developmen t o f
important technologie s tha t hav e a n impac t o n dail y life ; t o cit e onl y a mor e
recent example , th e adven t o f widesprea d compute r us e ove r th e pas t decade s
gave rise t o importan t an d influentia l ne w metaphor s fo r th e brai n an d fo r lan-
guage processing (Boy d 1993 : 486-87; Lakoff an d Johnson 1999: 251-52). Phe-
nomena such as the Internet are also generating new modes of human interaction,
which wil l presumabl y resul t i n th e formatio n o f ne w metapho r schemas .
Although long-term human habitation of space i s still in the realm o f science fic -
tion speculation , i t woul d b e interestin g t o imagin e wha t woul d happe n i f i t
became a reality and there wer e generation s o f children raised i n a zero-gravity
environment. Would they continue to make use of older "gravity-based" schemas
out o f linguisti c o r cultura l conservatism, o r woul d the y eventuall y tos s thes e
metaphors aside an d develop their own entirely new—an d to us, quite alien and
perhaps incomprehensible—sets of conceptual metaphors ?
     In any case, despite th e great strides in technology that have been made over
the centuries an d the large impac t these technologie s hav e had on our lives , the
basic share d huma n environment ha s remained remarkabl y stable. W e still hav e
to physically move i n order t o ge t something tha t we want, still obtai n mos t of
our information about the world through our sense of sight (the experiential basis
of th e commo n primar y metaphor, KNOWIN G I S SEEING), an d overal l th e basi c
repertoire o f motions and physical interactions possessed b y a modern American
is not terribly different fro m that possessed by , say, a Chinese person in the fourt h
century B.C. Despite the advent of electricity, moveable type , computers, an d the
Internet, then , th e basi c stabilit y of th e huma n body an d th e environmen t wit h
which i t is forced to interact across culture s and time would lead u s to expect a
high degre e of universalit y in basi c metapho r schemas . A s w e shal l se e a s w e
begin to apply the methods of cognitive linguistics to classical Chinese texts, the
degree o f similarit y we wil l find between moder n Englis h an d ancien t Chines e
conceptual metaphor s i s quite striking, even when it comes t o quite abstract an d
presumably culturall y contingent domains . Whil e this might seem surprisin g or
unlikely fro m th e perspectiv e o f neo-Cartesia n postmoder n theory—wher e lin-
guistic-cultural system s ar e conceived o f (metaphorically!) a s sui generis, auton -
omous structures—it is rather to be expected fro m th e standpoint of the cognitive
theory of metaphor.
      In the chapters that follow I will use the method of metaphor analysis to dis-
cover conceptua l link s between thinker s in a more o r less share d linguisti c an d
cultural environment. As I will discuss again in the conclusion, though, the analy-
sis o f conceptua l metapho r als o represent s a n excitin g ne w methodolog y fo r
scholars intereste d i n cross-cultural comparison work , and the principle of expe -
riential realis m upo n whic h thi s methodolog y i s base d provide s a theoretica l
grounding fo r comparativ e wor k i n general . Th e exploratio n o f th e conceptua l
"deep grammar " (t o invok e a Chomskya n metaphor ) tha t underlie s linguisti c
signs such as metaphor effectively get s us out of the postmodern "priso n house of
                                                Wu-wei as Conceptual Metaphor            27

language," allowin g us to use the body and bodily experience as a bridge to the
"other." At the same time, th e recognition tha t share d conceptua l structure s ar e
contingent upon bodies and physical environment, that no set of conceptual sche-
mas provide s unmediated acces s t o th e "thing s i n themselves, " an d tha t som e
degree o f cultural variation in schemas is to be expected allows us t o avoi d the
sort o f rigi d universalis m that characterizes Enlightenment-inspire d approaches
to the study of thought and culture. The method of conceptual metaphor analysis
might b e presente d a s a sor t o f "middl e way " betwee n mor e traditiona l
approaches to comparative work that focus mor e exclusively upon, respectively,
specific technica l terms (linguisti c signs) or genera l philosophica l theories. M y
hope is that this book will help to popularize this approach among scholars in the
humanities and social sciences .



Applying Metaphor Theory to Classical Chinese:
Wu-wei as Conceptual Metaphor

In th e followin g sections I wil l attempt t o sho w ho w th e theor y o f conceptua l
metaphor can help us to elucidate the concept of "wu-wei" or "effortless action."
As we shall see, the metaphor of wu-wei is strongly tied up with metaphoric con-
ceptions o f th e sel f an d agenc y tha t are share d cross-culturally , a fac t tha t will
help us greatly in exploring its cognitive structure. Therefore, before I can discuss
the metaphoric structure of wu-wei, I must first discuss th e schema s commonly
used to conceptualize the self.

     Conceptualizing the "Self
Perhaps one of the most common abstractions we need to conceptualize and deal
with in everyday decision making is ourselves (our "selves"). Lakoff an d Johnson
have mapped out some of the basic schemas we employ in English to conceptual-
ize and reason about the Self, and—as we will see later—almost all of these sche-
mas are found a s well in Warring States classical Chinese .
     With regard t o conceptions o f the self i n modern American English, Lakoff
and Johnson note that there is no single monolithic way that speakers of English
invoke in order to conceptualize inner life. We rely upon a variety of metaphoric
conceptions t o understand ourselves. These various metaphors do, however, draw
upon a fairly smal l number of source domains such as space, objec t possession ,
exertion o f physical force, an d social relationship s (1999 : 267). Although these
various schemas are at times literally contradictory, they are generally not incom-
patible—that is, they serve to supplement one another and thereby fit together to
form a coheren t conceptio n o f self . I n elucidatin g th e structur e o f th e wu-wei
metaphor, we will have reason to discuss several of these schemas .
     To begin with, it is necessary t o examine the most general metaphori c struc-
ture fo r conceptualizin g th e self , firs t identifie d b y Andre w Lakof f an d Mile s
28    Effortless Action

Becker 199 2 an d elaborated i n Lakoff and Johnson 1999 : 268-70 : the SUBJECT -
SELF schema. After examining a wide variety o f metaphors for the self i n modern
American English , Lakoff an d Becke r conclude d tha t English speaker s funda -
mentally experience themselve s in terms of a metaphoric split between a Subject
and one or more Selves. In this SUBJECT-SELF schema, the Subject is always con-
ceived o f a s person-lik e an d wit h a n existenc e independent fro m th e Sel f o r
Selves; i t i s th e locu s o f consciousness , subjectiv e experience , an d ou r
"essence"—everything that makes us who we are. The Self encompasse s every -
thing else about the individual, and can be represented b y a person, object , loca -
tion, faculty, physical organ, body, emotion, socia l role, persona l history , and so
on. The basic SUBJECT-SELF schem a can be mapped as follows:
      A Person —                          > Th     e Subject
      A Person, Thing, or Place — > Th             e Self
      A Relationship —>                    • Th    e Subject-Self Relationshi p

Consider, fo r example , th e expression , " I ha d t o forc e mysel f t o d o it. " Wha t
Lakoff an d Becker are arguing is that this phrase is based upo n a conceptual split
between a metaphoric Subjec t ("I")—th e ever-present locu s o f consciousness—
and a separat e Sel f ("myself ) tha t has t o b e "forced " t o d o wha t the Subjec t
wants i t to do . Thi s i s the Subject-Sel f spli t a t it s most basic. I n a n expressio n
such as, "My fear overwhelme d me," th e Self i s an emotion ("my fear") , distinc t
from th e Subjec t ("me") an d conceptualize d a s a physica l force no t unde r th e
Subject's control , whereas in the phrase " I wa s able to ste p outsid e o f myself, "
the Sel f i s conceptualized a s a metaphoric locatio n ( a kind of container ) wher e
the Subject normall y resides, bu t whic h the Subjec t ca n leave whe n it needs t o
"observe itself." Wha t makes al l of these expressions metaphori c is the fac t tha t
1) they are not literally true (e.g., ther e i s no "me" tha t is literally separate fro m
an "I" tha t can be physically "forced" t o do something), and 2) (as I will explain
shortly) the y dra w upo n concret e sourc e domains—objec t relations , physica l
forces, physica l locations o r containers—i n orde r t o describ e an d reaso n abou t
the abstract realm of "the self. "
     Many o f th e metaphor s fo r sel f I wil l describ e ar e merel y specia l case s o f
this singl e general metapho r system. 15 Phenomenologically, thi s is very signifi -
cant; as Lakoff an d Johnson note, "this schem a reveal s not only something dee p
about ou r conceptua l system s bu t als o somethin g dee p abou t ou r inne r experi -
ence, mainl y that we experience ourselve s a s a split" (269). Th e precise manner
in which this split is conceptualized, as well as the specifics of the "Relationship "
element mentione d i n th e mapping , then , depend s upo n th e concret e sourc e
domain tha t i s invoked . Som e o f th e mor e commo n sourc e domains—an d th e
more specifie d version s o f th e SUBJECT-SEL F metapho r tha t g o alon g wit h
them—will be described a s I relate the generic SUBJECT-SELF schema to the met-
aphor of wu-wei.
     Manipulating physical objects i s one o f the first things we learn ho w t o d o
and i s als o somethin g w e continu e t o d o frequentl y throughou t ou r lives . We
                                                Wu-wei as Conceptual Metaphor            29

should thus not be surprised that object manipulation serves as the source domain
for man y o f th e SUBJECT-SEL F metaphors , includin g that o f wu-we i itself. Th e
basic schema i s SELF-CONTROL IS OBJECT CONTROL, and sinc e th e mos t commo n
way t o control a n object is to exert force upon it, this schema i s often formulate d
as SELF-CONTRO L I S TH E FORCE D MOVEMEN T O F A N OBJECT , whic h ca n b e
mapped a s follows:

      SELF-CONTROL IS THE FORCED MOVEMENT OF AN OBJECT

      A Person —                          > Th e Subject
      A Physical Object —                 > Th e Self

      Forced Movement —                   > Contro l of Self by Subject

      Lack of Forced Movement — > Noncontro l of Self by Subject

Examples from English given by Lakoff an d Johnson include:
     I lifted m y arm. The yogi bent his body into a pretzel. I dragged myself
     out of bed. I held myself back from hittin g him. (1999: 271)
As w e shal l see , thi s schem a o f self-contro l an d objec t movemen t inform s th e
most basic metaphorical conception o f wu-wei, that of "effortlessness. "

     Primary Wu-wei Metaphor: Lack of Exertion
Generally, contro l o f th e objec t Sel f b y th e Subjec t i s desirable , bu t eve n i n
English w e sometime s spea k o f noncontro l o f th e Sel f i n a positiv e sense , a s
when a person who—perhap s afte r muc h effort an d no progress in learning how
to dance—at last succeeds an d explains, "I was finally able to let myself go." This
is the sense in which we are to understand the basic metaphor of wu-wei: literally
meaning "n o doing/effort/exertion, " i t refers metaphoricall y t o a stat e i n which
action is occurring even though the Subject is no longer exerting force. "Wu-wei"
itself thu s serve s a s th e mos t genera l metaphori c expressio n o f th e concep t o f
effortlessness o r lack of exertion. Sharing its conceptual schema structure are two
main "families" of metaphoric expressions, both of which fall under this rubric of
"effortlessness" bu t differ fro m eac h other slightly in conceptual structure.
The "Following" Family Th e schema upon which metaphors in this family are
based i s that of the Subject surrendering control and physical impetus to the Self.
The most common of these are as follows:
     following (cong $£ )
     following/adapting to (yin H )
     leaning on (yi ffi.)
     flowing alon g with (shun )§} )
In these metaphoric expressions, th e Subject is able to be free o f exertion becaus e
the Sel f i s allowe d t o d o al l o f th e work . Perhaps th e earlies t an d mos t famous
30    Effortless Action

example of such a metaphor is Confucius at age seventy as described i n Analects
2.4, able to "follow [cong] [his ] heart's desires withou t transgressing th e bounds."
Here Confucius, after a lifetime of exertion, i s able to relax and allow an aspect of
the Sel f — the desires of his heart —to take ove r the initiatio n of action , wit h the
Subject merely following along behind.
The "At Ease " Family A n alternat e famil y o f metaphor s expresse s th e sam e
concept o f effortlessness, bu t in a slightly different form . The structure of the "a t
ease" metaphors i s focuse d solel y upo n a unitary Subject , wh o i s portraye d a s
simply restin g o r no t exertin g force , wit h no mention of th e Self . Metaphor s i n
this family include th e following:
     at ease/at rest (an §:)
     relaxed (jlan fffi ; shu ff )
     still (/ing HO
     at rest (xi ,& ; she llf ; xiu ifc)
     wandering/rambling (xiaoyao jH^^anghuang tfrtH )
     playing/wandering (you S?)
Here there i s no explicit inclusio n of th e Sel f a s an agen t of action , althoug h of
course i t would be a logical entailment —based upon our knowledge o f physical
objects an d movement — that the Subject i s able to "rest" only because someon e
or something else has taken over. This entailment is actually spelled out explicitly
in a set of idiosyncratic metaphors foun d i n the Zhuangzi, where the unitary Sub-
ject can "rest," passively b e "housed" or "lodged," or be able to simply "go for a
ride," because th e normative order is doing the work:
     resting [xiu ffi- ] on the Potter's Whee l o f Heaven [tianjun 5^ ] (W41/
        G70)
     housed [zhai ^ E ] i n onenes s an d lodgin g [yu i S ] i n wha t canno t b e
        stopped [budeyi ^tf E] (W58/G148 )
     riding [cheng H i ] th e Tightnes s o f Heave n an d Eart h an d takin g th e
        reigns [yu ffll ] of th e discrimination s o f th e si x form s o f qi (W32 /
        G17)
Conceptually, then , the differenc e i n structur e betwee n th e "following " an d "a t
ease" families i s slight. We will se e that, as a consequence, th e "following " an d
"at ease " metaphors ar e ofte n use d i n combinatio n an d in a more o r les s inter -
changeable fashion .
     These tw o families of metaphors, both having to do with lack of exertion or
effortlessness, for m the core o f the wu-wei constellation an d determine it s basi c
conceptual structure. I n turn, though, the entailments of this basic structure moti -
vate other sets of conceptually related metaphors .

     Secondary Wu-wei Metaphor: Unself-consciousness
Object manipulatio n is no t th e onl y wa y t o conceptualiz e self-control . Anothe r
common way , found i n English (Lakof f an d Johnso n 1999 : 272-73 ) a s wel l a s
                                               Wu-wei as Conceptual Metaphor            31

classical Chinese , i s in terms o f object possession, which can be mapped a s fol-
lows:

      SELF-CONTROL IS OBJECT POSSESSION

      A Person —                 > Th e Subject
      A Physical Object —        > Th e Self
      Possession —               > Contro l o f Self
      Loss of Possession — > Los s of Control of Self

Examples from Englis h include "losing yoursel f o r "getting carried away, " and
this is generally understood i n a negative sense. We find such negative portrayals
of los s o f objec t possessio n i n classica l Chines e a s well . I n th e Zhuangzi, fo r
instance, we read of the second-rate shama n who is confronted with a true Daoist
master tha t "before h e [i.e. , th e shaman ] had eve n full y com e t o a hal t h e los t
himself [zishi § ^; i.e., lost his nerve] and ran away" (W96/G304).
     Nonetheless, thi s phenomenon i s not always given a negative valuation, for
"losing oneself i n the enjoyment of a book or work of art, for instance, is a desir-
able and pleasurable experience. I n cases suc h as this, the ordinary state of meta-
phorically "possessing" the self is conceived of as a restriction or burden, and the
elimination o f possessio n understoo d a s a kin d of release . W e might therefore
remap the schema in the following way to reflect this alternate valuation of object
possession:

      SUBJECT ESCAPES CONTROL OF SELF THROUGH OBJECT LOSS

      A Person —                  > Th e Subject
      A Physical Object —         > Th e Self
      Possession —                > Contro l of Subject by Self
      Loss of Possession —        > Subjec t Freed from Contro l by Self

Applying th e SUBJECT-SEL F an d OBJEC T POSSESSION schemas t o Warrin g States
texts suc h as the Zhuangzi allow s us to understan d more clearly suc h stories a s
that of Zi Q i of Southwall, who—after makin g his body like dead woo d an d his
mind like dead ashes through some sort of meditative technique—declares that "I
have lost myself (wu sang wo H SS^c) (W36/G45). Muc h has been made of this
passage b y scholar s suc h as Wu Guangming and David Hall, wh o see i t as evi-
dence o f two differen t type s of self in the Zhuangzi: the ww-sel f an d the wo-sel f
(Wu 1990 ; Hal l 1994) . As Paul Kjellberg has noted, however, the phrase wu sang
wo is simply proper classical Chinese, wu being the standard first-person subject
pronoun an d wo usuall y servin g a s th e first-perso n objec t pronou n (Kjellberg
1993a). I n thi s respect , th e sens e o f wu sang wo coul d hav e equall y bee n
expressed wit h interchangeable first-person reflexive pronouns (a s in wu sang ji
32    Effortless Action

iS1 5§ S o r ww zisang ^ § 5§ ), and the phrase itsel f i s neither mor e nor less
freighted wit h philosophical significanc e than the English phrase, "I lost myself."
As w e have noted, however , even this English expression i s significant i n that it
gives expression t o th e SUBJECT-SEL F an d OBJEC T POSSESSIO N conceptual sche -
mas, an d this is no les s true o f classica l Chinese . Metaphorically , then, Zi Qi' s
meditative technique has allowed hi m (the Subject) to escape th e contro l o f th e
Self—which, a s we shal l see, i s a common wa y to understan d Zhuangzian wu -
wei.
      Although th e litera l structur e o f th e OBJEC T LOS S schem a ca n b e distin -
guished fro m th e "effortless " metaphor s describe d above , th e tw o schema s ar e
closely linke d conceptuall y a s a result o f ou r experienc e o f th e world . That is ,
since physical effort require s concentration and focus, an entailment of effortless -
ness—one tha t follow s quit e naturall y for anyon e familia r with th e domai n of
physical exertion—is a n accompanyin g stat e o f unself-consciousness . I t i s thus
not surprisin g tha t the two schema s are ofte n associate d wit h one anothe r in
English. We see this phenomenon, fo r example, in the conceptual equivalenc e of
the concepts o f "letting yoursel f go [in enjoying an activity]" and "losing/forget -
ting yourself [i n an activity]." Here, the Subject ceasing to exert force on the Self
 ("letting yoursel f go") i s conceptually equivalent to the Subject "losing" or "for-
getting" (i.e., losing from consciousness) the Self . T o choose some examples
from th e Zhuangzi (ou r richest source for wu-wei metaphors), we can see forget-
 ting/losing linked to effortlessness in several passages :
     [He] forgets [wang] hi s liver and spleen, forgets/loses [yi 31 ] his ears and
     eyes, an d unself-consciously [mangran T?^] roams \fanghuang C^tM ]
     outside the dusty realm, wandering easily [xiaoyao IHSi ] in the service
     of wu-wei. (W207/G663 )
     Harmonize [righ t and wrong] with Heavenly equality and follow along
     with [yin H ] them by means of vastness, and in this way live out your
     years. Forget [wang] th e year s an d forge t Tightness , and lea p int o th e
     boundless. (W49/G108 )
A basi c entailmen t o f "forgetting " i s that , onc e yo u hav e forgotten something ,
you n o longe r kno w it . Thi s entailmen t allow s u s t o brin g the commo n litera l
expression o f unself-consciousness, buzhi ^%U ("unaware") , int o the losing/for -
getting family. Another association i s provided b y the fact tha t the experience of
strong emotion s ofte n induce s a kind o f unself-consciousness , a s the Subjec t is
overwhelmed by the Self (i n the form of an emotion). W e thus find strong emo-
tion being linked to the losing/forgetting famil y throughout Warring States texts ,
as in the example cite d fro m th e Zhuangzi above, where powerful fear causes th e
second-rate shama n to "lose himself an d run away. The strong emotion can also
be a positive one, though, as in the case of Confucian "joy" (le ^ ). In Analects
7.19 w e se e the conceptua l lin k between joy , forgetting , and litera l unself-con -
sciousness ver y elegantly illustrate d i n a single lin e wher e Confuciu s describe s
himself a s "th e typ e o f person wh o becomes s o absorbed i n his studie s tha t he
                                               Wu-wei as Conceptual Metaphor            33

forgets [wang] t o eat , whos e joy [le H I ] render s hi m fre e o f worries , an d wh o
grows old without being aware [buzhi] o f the passage of the years."
The "Forgetting" Family W e can thus classify al l of these metaphor s o r litera l
expressions a s being members o f what we will call the "forgetting" family :
    forgetting (wang 7s)
    losing (shi f e y i 5a; sang H )
    not knowing/unaware (buzhi ^%Q)
    joy (le HI) or other overpowering emotion.
Understood metaphoricall y i n term s o f th e OBJEC T LOS S schema , unself-con -
sciousness i s thus closely linke d to th e LAC K OF EXERTION schem a a s one o f it s
entailments, an d i s expresse d throughou t th e text s w e wil l b e examinin g b y
means of the "forgetting" famil y o f metaphors an d literal expressions . Together ,
effortlessness an d unself-consciousness represen t th e two conceptual, metaphori -
cal hallmarks of what we will be calling "wu-wei" activity.

     Related Metaphors
I cannot conclude my discussion of the metaphoric structure of wu-wei, however,
without mentioning some other familie s of metaphors tha t are often associated i n
Warring State s text s wit h effortlessnes s an d unself-consciousness . Thes e meta -
phors wor k together wit h th e primary an d secondar y wu-we i metaphors t o help
clarify the m or spell out more clearly their entailments.
The "Emptiness" Family Th e metapho r of emptiness or tenuousness (xu MI ) is
often associate d with wu-wei in writings that might be identified as "Daoist," as
well as in the writings of Xunzi, and serves t o supplement the "forgetting" famil y
of metaphors i n conveying the ide a of unself-consciousness. I t is based upo n an
alternate schem a fo r conceivin g o f the Subject-Self relationship , tha t of the SEL F
AS CONTAINER . This schem a derive s fro m ou r interaction s wit h bounded space s
and containers, an d can be mapped as follows:

      SELF AS CONTAINER

      A Person —                  > Th e Subject

      A Container —                > Th e Self

      Objects in Container — > Qualitie s of the Self

Virtues, vices , tendencies , characte r traits , an d knowledg e o f variou s sort s ar e
understood, through a basic ontological metaphor, as substances tha t can be "pu t
into" or "taken out of th e container of the Self. The CONTAINER SELF can be the
Self i n the most general sense, or merely a part of the self, such as the heart/mind
(xin 'L N) or the qi H, ("vital essence").
      In text s suc h a s th e Laozi o r Zhuangzi, th e container o f the Sel f bein g ren-
dered empt y or tenuous (xu) allows th e Subject to enjoy a state of effortlessnes s
34   Effortless Action

and unself-consciousness. A n interesting exampl e o f this is found in the "fastin g
of the mind" passag e fro m chapte r 4 of the Zhuangzi, wher e the mind is likene d
to a stomach that can be made empty through metaphorical fasting. Once the fast-
ing is complete, th e only thing left "inside" is the qi, which is described a s being
so tenuous a substance tha t it has space t o "receive things" an d serve a s a reser-
voir wher e the Way will naturally gather. The resul t of this psychic purge o f the
container o f the mind is said to be a Subject who can "play" (you 12) in a previ-
ously dangerou s cag e an d "lodge" itsel f i n "wha t canno t b e stopped " (budeyi)
(W58/G147)—thus linkin g the emptines s metapho r wit h metaphor s fro m the
effortlessness family .
Inner-Outer Family Th e metaphor s i n this famil y ar e base d upo n the SEL F AS
CONTAINER schem a but combin e thi s schema wit h anothe r metaphor , tha t of th e
ESSENTIAL SELF . As described i n Lakoff an d Johnson (1999 : 282-84), the ESSEN -
TIAL SEL F metaphor i s based upo n wha t they cal l th e "fol k theor y of essences":
that is, the idea that every object has "within it" an essence tha t makes it the kind
of thing it is and that this essence is the causal source o f every object' s "natural "
behavior (1999 : 214-15) . Applie d t o huma n beings , ou r "essence " i s usuall y
vaguely associate d wit h th e Subject . Ther e are , however , situation s whe n "ou r
concept o f who we are essentially . . . is incompatible with what we actually do"
(1999: 282), an d suc h situation s ar e explaine d b y invokin g th e ESSENTIA L SEL F
metaphor

      ESSENTIAL SELF

      Person 1 —>               • Th e Subject, with the Essenc e
      Person 2 —               > Sel f 1 , the Real Self (Fit s the Essence )
      Person o r Thing 3 — > Sel f 2, Not the Real Self (Doe s No t Fit the
                              Essence)

Consider th e phrase, " I a m not myself today." A s an apology o r explanation fo r
undesirable behavior , thi s metaphor posit s a desirable relationship—th e Subjec t
("I") bein g coterminous wit h Self 1 (the "real" self)—that ha s failed or been dis-
rupted. I n this expression, Sel f 2 is not mentioned explicitly , but this is presum -
ably "who" th e Subject "was" whe n the undesirable behavior was going on. Self
2 is , however, mentioned explicitl y i n such simila r phrases as , "That wasn't th e
real me talking." Here, Self 2 has taken over control of the Subject, with the exist-
ence of Self 1 being implied: the existence o f a self that is not the "real" me pre-
sumes the existence of self that is the real me, who has presumably taken contro l
now that the Subject is apologizing.
      Lakoff an d Johnso n not e thre e differen t specia l case s o f this metaphor , bu t
the one that is the most relevant for my project i s the metaphor of the INNER SELF ,
                                               Wu-wei as Conceptual Metaphor            35

which involve s combining th e ESSENTIA L SEL F metaphor wit h the SEL F A S CON-
TAINER schema :

      ESSENTIAL SELF + SELF AS CONTAINER

      Inside of Container —                > Sel f 1 (Fits Subject/Essence )

      Outside Surface of Con- —            > Sel f 2 (Does Not Fit Subject/
      tainer Essence                                  )

This is a very common an d immediately comprehensible metapho r i n both mod -
ern English and classical Chinese . "Sh e seem s friendly, " we might say, "but tha t
is jus t a facad e [concealin g he r rea l (i.e. , internal ) self]. " Similarly , Ya n Hu i
explains a scheme i n chapter 4 of the Zhuangzi where he intends to be "inwardly
straight [zhi f i ] while outwardl y bendin g [qu ff i —lit . crooked]" 19 (W56-57 /
G143)—that is, seeming o n the (false) outside t o be agreeing with a wicked ruler
while (really) on the inside maintaining his correctness .
     The combinatio n o f ESSENTIA L SELF + SEL F AS CONTAINER becomes crucia l
for ou r understandin g of wu-we i when it i s adopted a s the structura l basis fo r a
metaphor popularized b y the Laozi: that of the "natural" (ziran § ^ ). Meaning
literally "so-of-itself," ziran refers t o the way a thing i s when it follows it s own
internal Essence. Metaphorically, the image evoked b y the term ziran is of actions
emerging "naturally" ou t o f th e container of th e Self—a n exampl e o f th e NATU-
RAL CAUSATIO N IS MOTION OU T metaphor note d b y Lakof f an d Johnso n (1999 :
214) i n their discussion o f events an d causes. W e will see that this ziran meta -
phor i s associate d throughou t Daois t text s wit h both effortlessnes s an d unself-
consciousness.
The "Fitting " Family Thi s famil y o f metaphors concern s th e unitary Subject' s
relationship t o the world , wit h bot h Subject an d World conceived o f as physical
objects. I t can be mapped a s follows:

     The Subject —                        > Objec t A

     The World —                          > Objec t B

     Proper Relation

     Between Subject and World —> • Objec t A physically fitting or
                                     matching up with Object B

Conceptual metaphor s i n this family includ e the following:
    yi It (fitting, appropriate)
    he H " (fitting, matching)
    he f n (harmonizing )
    dang H (appropriate, matching )
    shi J8 S (appropriate , fitting )
    pel IB (accompanying, fitting together)
36    Effortless   Action

An extension o f thi s metaphor give s u s th e popular metaphor s o f "timely " (shi
Bf ) , wher e th e Subject' s action s ar e conceive d o f a s someho w "matchin g up "
with the situation, and "responsiveness" (ying HI) , where the Subject is conceptu-
alized a s a thing being stimulated or move d (gan OH ) by th e WORL D A S OBJECT .
All o f thes e metaphor s ar e relate d t o effortlessnes s an d unself-consciousnes s
through our shared experience o f the world—that is, our knowledge that no exer-
tion o r consciou s struggl e i s necessar y whe n part s fit , clothe s fit , th e season s
come o n time , o r on e i s provoke d b y a n appropriat e stimulus . This conceptua l
connection is nicely illustrated by a passage from th e Zhuangzi, where we see the
"fitting" metaphor woven together wit h metaphors from both the "forgetting" an d
"inner-outer" families:
     You forget your feet when the sho e fit s [shi M ], and forge t your waist
     when th e bel t fits . [Similarly] , yo u forge t righ t an d wron g whe n th e
     mind fits, and remain unwavering on the inside and unmoved by the out-
     side when events come together in a fitting fashion. You begin with what
     is fitting and never experienc e wha t is not fitting when you experienc e
     the comfort [shi M] of forgetting what is comfortable. (W206-7/G662 )

     Metaphorical Coherence
One might note at this point that the various metaphor schemas are in many cases
mutually inconsisten t a t the litera l level. For instance , it is difficul t t o reconcil e
the fact that the Subject is alternately conceptualized a s a unitary object (as in the
"fitting" o r "at ease" metaphors) o r as divided i n terms of the Subject-Sel f split .
As Lakoff an d Johnson hav e noted, however , literal consistency i s not somethin g
that w e require o f ou r metaphors , a s lon g a s the y wor k togethe r i n a coheren t
fashion. Lakoff and Johnson (1980: 87-105) describe th e manner in which mutu-
ally inconsistent metaphors for suc h abstractions as an argumen t (ARGUMENT AS
WAR, ARGUMENT AS JOURNEY, ARGUMENT AS CONTAINER) Wor k togethe r t o for m
a coheren t metaphorica l conceptio n o f argument . Basically, sinc e n o one meta -
phorical image is sufficient t o generate all of the entailments necessary to concep-
tualize and deal with the complex, abstract phenomenon of "argument," different
schemas ar e invoked in various situations to highlight the entailments relevant to
that situation. What makes thes e literall y inconsisten t schema s coher e conceptu -
ally i s th e fac t that, althoug h eac h ha s it s own se t o f uniqu e entailments , thes e
entailments partially overlap and supplement one another.21
      We will see that this is the case as well with the metaphors having to do with
wu-wei and the attainment of wu-wei. 22 A good example of multiple-structurings
of single concepts is the se t of metaphors used to conceptualize xing 1 4 (huma n
nature) tha t are invoked by Xunzi in his essa y entitle d "Huma n Natur e Is Bad"
(Kill: 150-62/W434^9) . The metaphor schemas invoke d are literally inconsis-
tent, but nonetheless conceptually coherent, because each o f the m targets a par-
ticular entailment:
                                               Wu-wei as Conceptual Metaphor           37

      1. Human natur e is an interna l force tha t we ca n follo w (cong) o r flow
         along with (shun).
         Targeted entailment: do not let this force carry the Subject away.
     2. Human nature is a physical location, like the starting point o f a jour-
         ney, tha t we leave (li SI) and to which do not return (gui If) .
         Targeted entailment : wha t we have at birth is only the starting point
         for the long "journey" of self-cultivation; we would be "regressing" if
         we wished to return to our inborn state.
     3. Human natur e i s an object w e lose (shi ^ , sang 5§ ) an d canno t
         recover.
         Targeted entailment : ou r inbor n natur e i s somethin g quickl y grown
         out of; we cannot attain this state again, even if it were desirable t o do
         so.
     4. Human nature is a warped materia l to which we must apply external
         force if we wish it to be straight.
         Targeted entailment : self-cultivatio n (makin g ou r Sel f "straight" )
         requires a great deal of effort an d fundamental reformation.
     5. Human nature is a thing shared with others.
         Targeted entailment : w e ar e al l equa l a t birth , an d thu s al l equally
         capable of becoming sages .
The fact that some of these metaphoric schemas are literally inconsistent does not
present a problem fo r Xunzi or the reader because they are conceptually coherent
by virtu e of thei r simila r o r complementar y entailments . Fo r instance , whethe r
our inborn nature i s a "place" that we leave and to which we do not return or a
"thing" that we lose and cannot recover, the basic entailment is the same: that, as
we might say in English, "there i s no goin g back." Similarly, although the por -
trayal of human nature as a substance alway s shared b y everyone contradicts th e
metaphor o f it s being somethin g that we irrevocably lose , thes e schemas d o not
come int o direc t conceptua l conflic t becaus e the y hav e ver y differen t target s
(equal opportunit y vs . canno t regress) , whic h mean s tha t non e o f thei r entail -
ments directly contradic t each other . That is, we could understand huma n nature
as something share d a t birth while still realizing that it is "lost" as we mature. In
this sense, the HUMA N NATUR E AS SHARED MATERIAL metapho r makes explicit an
entailment tha t i s a t least consisten t with , and perhap s implie d by , som e of th e
other metaphors: w e all "leave" from th e same place or have the same "raw mate -
rial" to work with.
     With this said, we must also note that not all literally inconsistent metaphor s
are necessaril y conceptuall y coherent . A s w e shal l see , som e o f th e metapho r
schemas relate d t o wu-we i i n Warrin g State s thought—particularl y metaphor s
having t o d o wit h self-cultivatio n aimed a t producing wu-wei—posses s centra l
entailments tha t are mutually contradictory. To return to the Xunzian example, we
find in the "Human Nature Is Bad" chapte r a further metaphori c characterizatio n
of huma n natur e tha t does no t si t wel l conceptuall y wit h th e fiv e alread y dis -
cussed:
38    Effortless Action

     6. Human nature is a human agent that is bad, and we know that it is bad
         because i t desires (yu W() o r wishes (yuan ffi ) t o be good .
         Targeted entailment : huma n nature is bad
         Problematic side-entailment : huma n natur e ha s interna l tendencies
         toward being good, precisely becaus e it is bad.
As we shall see in chapter 7, this is an example o f the sort of internalist elemen t
that creeps into the Xunzi fro m tim e t o time an d serve s a s a see d o f conceptua l
dissonance. W e shall se e many such example s throughou t the texts. I n the Ana-
lects, for instance, ther e i s a conceptual tensio n betwee n th e two primary meta -
phors fo r self-cultivation , SELF-CULTIVATIO N A S ADORNMEN T an d SELF -
CULTIVATION A S CRAF T REFORMATION . A n importan t entailmen t o f th e firs t
schema is that a suitable substrat e must be present i f adornment i s to take place ,
while the secon d schem a involve s a complete reformatio n o f th e origina l mate -
rial—its origina l structur e being mor e o r less irrelevant . Similarly, we see a ten-
sion i n th e Menciu s betwee n th e SELF-CULTIVATIO N A S AGRICULTUR E
metaphor—an entailmen t o f whic h i s th e nee d fo r externa l effor t ove r a lon g
period of time in order to guide and help nourish one's innate endowment—and a
schema whereby one's nature is conceived o f as a wild force (such as a flood or
stampede of animals) that can simply be released i n an instant.
     Indeed, part of the point of this project i s to show that all of the metaphoric
portrayals of self-cultivation aimed at producing wu-wei found i n the mainstream
Warring States text s involve schemas withi n the same tex t that are both literally
incompatible an d conceptually incoheren t because the y contain contradictory (o r
at least competing) entailments. Thes e instance s o f conceptual dissonanc e wil l
be particularly interestin g t o us, because the y serve a s the most visible symptom s
of th e tensio n buil t into th e goa l o f mainstrea m Warring State s self-cultivation :
the so-calle d "parado x o f wu-wei " mentione d i n th e introduction . Generall y
speaking, wha t we will find is that all of the thinkers examined employ a mix of
externalist an d internalist metaphors fo r self-cultivation, which engenders a ten-
sion wit h regard t o entailments between "trying" and "not trying. " That is, if self-
cultivation requires th e fundamental reformation of the "stuff' o f one's nature or
the fasting away of some inbor n "essence" (as in the Zhuangzi), a n entailment is
that w e mus t tr y rathe r har d no t t o try . On th e othe r hand , i f self-cultivatio n is
conceived o f metaphorically as the simple release of some innate force or superfi-
cial adornment of some innate quality, the entailment is that we do not really have
to try too har d not to try—wu-we i wil l happen , as a Laozia n metapho r woul d
have it, "so-of-itself' (ziran).
     The continuing tension between thes e tw o basic types of metaphors i s quite
significant phenomenologically . Th e religious goa l o f the thinker s I will discuss
later is to achieve th e ease of wu-wei, and therefore th e idea of "no effort" needs
to b e metaphoricall y conveyed . A t th e sam e time , wu-we i i s understoo d a s a n
achieved state , an d eac h thinke r therefor e ha s t o specif y som e sor t o f effort-fu l
program fo r attaining this state. What we will see in the development o f pre-Qin
thought is a kind of movement back and forth between an emphasis on external or
internal metaphor s fo r self-cultivation, with each thinke r being characterized b y
which side he chooses t o emphasize. No matter which side is dominant, however,
                                               Wu-wei as Conceptual Metaphor           39

we shall see that the opposing typ e of metaphor—bringing along with it all of its
incompatible entailments—stil l manages t o creep bac k in somehow, settin g u p a
field of conceptual dissonance . Wha t follows in the next chapters i s an attempt to
portray th e development o f pre-Qin though t as a continuing effort t o invoke new
sorts o f metaphors fo r th e sel f an d self-cultivation—draw n fro m th e domain s o f
human technolog y o r th e functionin g of th e natura l world—i n a n attemp t t o
resolve thi s conceptua l dissonance . A s w e shal l see , non e o f thes e attempt s
proves entirel y successful , and this failure itself (a s I will discuss i n the conclu -
sion) has significant phenomenological implications.



Wu-wei in the Pre-Confucian Traditio n

Although th e ter m wu-we i itself doe s no t come int o widesprea d us e until fairly
late i n the Warring States period , th e metaphoric idea l tha t it describes—acting
effortlessly an d unself-consciousl y i n perfec t harmon y wit h th e cosmos , an d
thereby acquirin g a n almos t magica l efficac y i n moving through th e worl d an d
attracting people to oneself—can b e identified as a central theme in Chinese reli -
gious thought in texts as early as the Book of Odes (Shijing f t M) and the Book of
History (Shujing ftM) . Thes e texts ar e relatively vague and not nearly as con-
ceptually developed a s "writings o f the masters" we will be looking at , but eve n
here one can see instances o f metaphors that will later become central to the War-
ring States conceptualization o f wu-wei.
      The theme of personal perfectio n being reflected in both harmonious, effica -
cious actio n and in one's physical appearance ca n be found throughou t the Book
of Odes.25 The aristocratic lor d or gentleman (junzi fllP) 26 i s often described a s
embodying the martial an d socia l virtue s that become hi s station wit h an effort -
less ease that reveals itself in his efficacious skil l as much as his personal bearing .
Metaphorically, thi s is understood a s a kind of "fitting" (yi Jt ) wit h the world.
Consider, fo r instance, the description b y an admiring poetess o f the object of her
affection i n ode 214:
     Magnificent are the flowers, gorgeous their yellow;
     I have seen this young one,
     And how glorious he is!
     How glorious he is!
     This is why he enjoys good fortune... .
     Magnificent are the flowers, their yellow, their white;
     I have seen thi s young one,
     Driving white horses wit h black manes,
     Four white horses wit h black manes,
     And six reins all glossy.
     He rides to the left, to the left ,
     My lord does it fittingly [yi![];
     He rides to the right, the right,
40    Effortless Action

     My lord has the knack \youzhi W*I].
     And because h e has the knack,
     it shows in his deportment [sizhi fK/£.] .
A similar picture of consummate mastery and effortless accordanc e wit h what is
"proper" or what "fits" th e situation is rendered in ode 106 :
     Lo! How splendid he is!
     How grand and tall.
     How fine, the brow,
     His lovely eyes s o bright.
     He runs agilely, moving in a stately way;
     When he shoots, he is skilled.
     Lo! How illustrious he is!
     The beautiful eye s so clear,
     Perfect i n propriety [yi fit],
     Can shoot all day at a target,
     And never miss the mark [bu chu zheng 'FtBlE].
     Truly a proper kinsman of mine!
     Lo! How handsome he is!
     His clear brow well-rounded ,
     When he dances, he is in perfect step, 28
     When he shoots, alway s piercing the target.
     His four arrow s all find their mark, 29
     In this way he guards against disorder [luan SI]. 30
The idea of being able to shoot all day while "never missin g the mark" ha s defi -
nite metaphorical , mora l overtone s —zheng I E signifyin g "proper" o r morall y
"upright" a s well as the central mark of a target —and it is in this sense tha t this
ode has been read by later commentators. Nonetheless , th e wu-wei "lord" or gen-
tleman i n the ode s primaril y represents a martial , aristocratic idea l —the hand -
some and physically powerful warrior .
     A more explicitly moral idea l of wu-wei is to be found displayed b y another
exemplary typ e in the Odes: th e virtuous sage-ruler o f old. Here both effortless -
ness an d unself-consciousness ar e emphasized. I n ode 241, for instance, w e find
the Lord on High (shangdi _h^ ) praising King Wen:
     I cherish you r bright Virtue;
     Despite you r great reknown, you do not flaunt it,
     Despite your enduring prominence, i t remains unchanged.
     Without recognizing o r being conscious o f it [bushibuzhi ^ts^^D]
     You go along with [shun IS] my model.31
King Wen is able to effortlessly "flow along with" the normative standar d embod -
ied by the Lord o n High in a completely unself-consciou s manner . Although this
accordance wit h the cosmos endow s him with a powerful moral Virtue, King Wen
does no t dwell upon it or parade i t in front o f others, no r allow it to become cor-
rupted b y arroganc e o r pride . H e enjoy s hi s Virtu e naturall y an d unself-con -
                                                Wu-wei as Conceptual Metaphor            41

sciously. The description of the perfectly tuned moral skill of King Xuan in od e
304 is similar:
     King Xuan martially established order:
     When he received a small state, it prospered ,
     When he received a large state, it prospered;
     He followed in the footsteps [of his ancestors] [shuailii $ ® ] without
       straying/transgressing \yue 18],
     And everywhere he gazed [suishi H^Jl ; lit. following his gaze] the stan-
       dards were realized....
     He received th e blessing [xiu ffi; lit . ease, rest] of Heaven.
     He was not forceful, no t pressing,
     Not hard, nor soft ;
     He spread his government in gentle harmony,
     And all the blessings [o f Heaven] he combined in his person.33
Here Kin g Xuan's effortlessness is portrayed as a consequence o f allowing him-
self to be simply drawn along by the example of his ancestors ("following in their
footsteps"), wit h th e resul t bein g a kin d o f spontaneou s efficacy— a sig n tha t
Xuan possesses Heavenl y "ease" (xiu ffi.). We also see a reference to this kind of
ease in the description o f the great sage-king Yao that is part of the opening pas-
sage of the Book of History: "H e wa s reverent, intelligent, cultured and thought-
ful, al l with a gracious ease [an'an Sit^S c ]" (Legge 1991b : 15) . As we shall see ,
this metapho r o f being "a t ease" (an) will become a favorite Confucia n expres -
sion for wu-wei.
       We noted abov e tha t th e effortles s moral skil l possessed b y Kin g Xuan in
ode 304 is portrayed a s a result of a special relationship to Heaven. This i s als o
the case with the other sage-ruler exemplars that we find in the Odes?6" Consider ,
for example, the lin k between effortles s "fitting " (yi 3lC ) and th e favo r o f Heaven
that is described i n ode 166 :
     Heaven protects and settles you,
     It causes your grain to flourish
     So that there is nothing that is not proper/fitting [yi].
     You receive from Heaven the hundred emoluments;
     It sends down to you enduring good fortune.
     Only the days are not sufficient (t o hold so much blessing).
In this ode, thi s fortunate ruler is said also to have accumulated a powerful Virtue
by mean s o f "auspiciou s an d pure " offering s an d flawles s ritua l behavior . Thi s
concept of Virtue provides another (albei t indirect) link between Heaven and wu-
wei. Recall that , in the descriptio n o f the noble arche r i n ode 106 , i t is sai d that
his harmonize d skil l i s th e resul t o f havin g "perfected propriety, " an d tha t hi s
effortless abilit y to hit th e mar k (zheng I E ) serves to guar d agains t "disorder. "
Virtue i s portraye d throughou t th e Odes a s a sor t o f charismati c powe r tha t
accrues t o thos e wh o ar e rituall y correct—tha t is , thos e wh o accor d wit h
Heaven's order . Attaining a state of wu-we i harmony with Heaven's order, they
are thus rewarded wit h a power that not only brings them personal benefit but also
42    Effortless Action

allows them to more effectively realize Heaven's wil l in the world.35 The idea of
Virtue as a power granted by Heaven to one who accords wit h its will is not only
found throughou t the Odes and History bu t is also one of the earliest identifi -
able religiou s theme s i n China , bein g traceabl e t o th e mos t ancien t writte n
records i n China, the Shang oracle bones and Zhou bronze inscriptions.
     We can eve n fin d i n th e Odes prefigurements o f th e ide a tha t conventional
morality a s expresse d i n th e rite s an d th e classic s no t onl y ha s it s origi n i n
Heaven but is also somethin g grounde d in the affectiv e an d biological natur e of
human beings themselves. In ode 260, we read that Heaven has created people in
such a way that they respond instinctively to Virtue:
     In giving birth to the multitude of the common people,
     Heaven created things and created models [ze ill] .
     That the people hold to the norms
     Is because they love this beautiful Virtue. 38
In ode 239, the "joyous and pleased lord " is described as taking great pleasure in
his virtuous , ritually correc t action—feelin g a s a t hom e an d a t eas e wit h th e
demands o f ritual as " a haw k soaring throug h the skie s o r a fish leaping i n th e
deep"; in ode 252, w e even find a similar "joyous an d pleased lord " enjoying a
state of wu-wei ease and social virtue that is explicitly linked to the fulfillment o f
his xing t t o r "natural course of development" :
     There is a curving slope,
     The whirlwind comes from th e south;
     The joyous and pleased lor d
     Comes t o play [you J&], comes to sing,
     And so inspires my song:
     "Relaxed i s your play,
     Pleasant and easy is your rest [xiu ffi.}.
     Joyous and pleased lor d
     May you fulfill you r xing 14,
     And like the former princes (you r ancestors) brin g it to completion .
As we shall see in the chapters tha t follow, this connection betwee n wu-wei , Vir-
tue, human nature, and the normative order i s inherited by later mainstream Chi-
nese thinkers.
